
Advanced SystemCare (formerly Advanced Windows Care) is a computer tool for Windows 7, Windows XP, Windows Vista and Windows 2000 created by IObit. It is used to improve computer performance and speed.
Advanced SystemCare includes a free version and a PRO version. Functions on both versions include cleaning up computer registries,April 24, 2011. "How to clean up the junk on your PC." The Times Of India. Accessed September 2011. do a disk defragmentation, scan for malware, and clean up broken shortcuts.
Quick care options includes two functions: Diagnose System and Maintain Windows. Diagnose System includes optimizing and repairing the system configuration, preventing spyware, defragmenting the disk and a security analyzer, which scans the computer to find hijacked settings.

The Maintain Windows includes cleaning up spyware, cleaning up the registry, privacy sweep and cleaning up junk files.
Advanced SystemCare includes utilities such as tuneup, security and admin tools.August 3, 2011. "IObit’s Advanced SystemCare Surpasses 130 Million Downloads, Staking Claim as Most Downloaded PC Care Tool Available Today." Yahoo News. Accessed September 2011."IObit launches Advanced SystemCare 4." PC & Tech Authority. Accessed September 2011. The tuneup utilities are cleaning and fixing up disks, boosting the system, removing duplicate shortcuts and Smart RAM. The security utilities are backing up files in the drivers and system, helping with Internet Explorer security and checking system files. The admin utilities are startup and Windows manager, Restore Center and Disk Explorer.

==Differences between Free and Pro version==

Free version's functionality include basic system clean, fix, and optimization, as well as basic protection from security threats.
The Pro version includes more automated tools: Fuller system tune-up for speed, clean windows registry in depth, automatic and active optimization, malware & spyware scan and removal, 24/7 technical support, automatic updating, and different skins and themes.

==Critical reception==

CNET Editor's Review states, "Advanced SystemCare Free 4 wants to be it all when it comes to keeping your system clean. It gives you a wealth of tools, rolling many of parent company IOBit's better-known system utilities--or at least those utilities' engines--into one convenient package." In addition, Advanced SystemCare was awarded as a top 10 download of 2010 by CNET.

==Releases in Advanced SystemCare 4==

ASC4 gives a user enhanced PC cleanup and tuneup. Additional features can boost system performance, support additional cleanup, deeper registry cleanup, more powerful disk defragmentation, creating more RAM, offers a maintenance toolbox with 20 tuneup and cleanup tools and more advanced security for a PC user.

==Advanced SystemCare 5==

Advanced SystemCare 5 is the beta edition. The Quick Care gives a PC user quick PC tuneup. The Deep care option scans and cleans the whole computer, which cleans registry, optimizes the PC, and detects and fixes other problems completely. The toolbox has more than 20 tools, and the turbo boost can speed up computers and improve performance. The program is described by PC Advisor as a "do everything"  suite for PCs.

==About Malware Fighter==

Capabilities include cleaning up malware, spyware, adware, bots, trojans, etc. It detects, cleans and blocks unwanted applications on the PC. It includes a "Startup Guard", "Browser Guard", "File Guard", "Network Guard", "USD Disk Guard", "Process Guard", "Cookie Guard" and "Malicious Action Guard".

==Criticisms of Advanced SystemCare 5==

Critics suggest that the program does not live up to its name, and compares poorly to equivalent free software. A significant percent of individuals that have installed the Advanced SystemCare software have reported various computer problems and 'glitches'  

==See also==

* Desktop Cleanup Wizard
* Disk Cleanup
* TuneUp Utilities
* CCleaner
* IObit Security 360

==References==


