
C2Call (

==History==

C2Call was founded in 2008 by CEO, Martin Feuerhahn and CTO, Michael Knecht. Actai’s customers included Germany’s largest MVNO, Aldi Talk and one of Germany’s largest ISPs, the Freenet AG.
In May 2008, they spun off C2Call to incorporate C2Call GmbH in Werl, Germany. Transferring all related IP to C2Call GmbH to prepare it for external funding and international expansion.
In February 2009, C2Call introduced FriendCaller  into the digital communications marketplace, earning instant recognition for its innovative contribution to the ever-changing social networking industry.

===Operation===

C2Call works on the principles of Java by temporarily loading a Java widget into Internet browsers such as Internet Explorer, Mozilla Firefox, Opera, Safari, Chrome and other browsers that support Javascript. and is compatible with leading operating systems like Windows, Linux, and Macintosh
Unlike other VoIP-based telephony services, there is no software to download, install and configure. 
After perfecting FriendCaller’s VoIP platform, C2Call GmbH applied a great deal of time and resources toward constructing ensured network compatibility with a wide array of standard and mobile computing devices. Individuals who own Apple Inc products such as the iPhone, iPad, and iPod Touch can enjoy the same connective perks built into FriendCaller’s browser-based version, as well as the service’s VoIP downloadable version from Appstore and Google Play.

==C2Call's Products and Services==

For those who place the bulk of their phone calls from home or work computers, C2Call GmbH’s WebPhone version complies with all browser-powered VoIP protocol. FriendCaller’s WebPhone can be permanently saved on almost any desktop computer free of charge. Users can have 7-Way Cross-platform Mobile Video Chat in real time with up to 27 people.
C2Call GmbH’s FriendCaller for Android operating systems and iOS Operating System allow users to experience the power of Mobile Group Video Calling. 
Users of Android, iPhone, iPod touch and iPad earn free calling credits by watching a short video or downloading their favorite apps with "OfferWall" feature available for all iOS 
People who own a Nokia S40 device can make the most of FriendCaller as well.
C2Call GmbH’s FriendCaller is also compatible with Facebook, the world’s largest social networking site. Users can login to FriendCaller using their Facebook credentials. FriendCaller's Facebook VoIP app takes the hassle out of inviting friends to join C2Call’s VoIP network, offering a host of benefits beyond FriendCaller’s highly affordable communication solutions. 
The unique CallMe-Link,
Available either free or at a cost of as low as only two cents per minute for overseas connection. C2Call’s VoIP platform allows users to place local and international phone calls from their homes or offices, saving 80 to 90 percent in comparison to fees charged by traditional phone companies.

==Funding and Financial Services==

Draper Investment Company proudly supports Germany-based startup C2Call GmbH, 
The Draper Investment Company portfolio has followed VoIP since near its inception, demonstrating the company’s enthusiasm for IT ventures. Draper Investment Company invested in C2Call GmbH and various other VoIP-savvy companies due to the investor’s belief that VoIP will likely one day eclipse the more traditional telephony methods. 
To foster growth of C2Call’s FriendCaller service, the company raised more than $2 million  High-Tech Grunderfonds and Klaus Wecken, co-founder of KHK Software (now taken over by Sage Group)

==C2Call's Environmental Record==

C2Call has been making efforts to minify their impact on the environment and has all its working operated under green technology powered servers.
C2Call hopes to manufacture products that will better protect the environment and save energy.

==References==

==External links==

*http://www.C2Call.com
*http://www.friendcaller.com
*http://www.actai.com

