
In the context of Wikipedia, conflict of interest editing is the editing of Wikipedia articles by people whose background means that their motives are likely to conflict with the encyclopedia's neutrality policy.  Conflict of interest editing includes  paid editing or paid advocacy, when employees, contractors, or those with financial connection to individuals, products, corporations, organizations, political campaigns or governments edit articles related to those subjects. Although these edits may often involve minor factual corrections and changes, significant media attention has revolved around the editing of articles which removes or downplays negative information and adds or highlights positive information by editors with a conflict of interest.
Wikipedia is free for anyone to edit, but the site maintains a neutral point of view policy.  The encyclopedia's official stance on editors who have a conflict of interest strongly discourages them from working in areas where they may be intentionally or unintentionally biased.  Wikipedia co-founder Jimmy Wales has argued that editors who have a clear political or financial conflict of interest should never directly edit articles, but instead propose edits to other editors on article talk pages, and seek their feedback.
A number of controversies have risen around conflict of interest and paid editing.  In 2006 Wikipedia editor Gregory Kohs was banned from Wikipedia after he began openly soliciting for work as a paid editor.  In 2007 a website called WikiScanner was founded which allowed users to match the IP addresses of Wikipedia editors with known company and organization offices.  WikiScanner, and other investigations, revealed that Diebold, the Central Intelligence Agency, The Vatican, Sony, Bell Pottinger, Portland Communications and many other individuals, companies, and politicians have edited or had people from their offices edit their own or related Wikipedia articles.
Several companies exist today which charge for Wikipedia editing.  Some public relations firms offer services related to the monitoring and editing of topics on the encyclopedia.  As negative press has grown over conflict of interest editing, some public relations professionals have sought to improve the relationship between their industry and Wikipedia, as well as to influence its policies and procedures to be more accommodating of good faith efforts to edit from PR professionals.  A Facebook group, Corporate Representatives for Ethical Wikipedia Engagement (CREWE) was started to work on these issues, and the Public Relations Society of America and the Chartered Institute of Public Relations have been involved in efforts with Wikipedia to improve guidance for PR practitioners and develop best practices in this area.

==Wikipedia policy==

Wikipedia is known for being "the encyclopedia that anyone can edit". However the encyclopedia has a strict neutrality policy; in 2007, the policy stated that debates are "described, represented, and characterized, but not engaged in."
Wikipedia's conflict of interest guideline states (as of 2012) that a conflict of interest (COI) is an "incompatibility between the aim of Wikipedia, which is to produce a neutral, reliably sourced encyclopaedia, and the aims of an individual editor," and that "COI editing involves contributing to Wikipedia in order to promote your own interests or those of other individuals, companies, or groups. Where advancing outside interests is more important to an editor than advancing the aims of Wikipedia, that editor stands in a conflict of interest."
Wikipedia co-founder Jimmy Wales has stridently opposed Wikipedia editors being paid for their work and in particular paid editors directly editing articles.  In 2009 he stated that "It is not ok with me that anyone ever set up a service selling their services as a Wikipedia editor, administrator, bureaucrat, etc...I will personally block any cases that I am shown. There are of course some possibly interesting alternatives, not particularly relevant here, but the idea that we should ever accept paid advocates directly editing Wikipedia is not ever going to be ok. Consider this to be policy as of right now."
Some cases of paid editing on Wikipedia are not considered to give rise to conflicts of interest.  One is the "reward board" on Wikipedia, which lets editors trade tasks with each other, sometimes for monetary compensation.  More recently, formal partnerships arose between galleries, libraries, archives and museums and individual Wikipedia editors, some of whom are paid for their work.

==Incidents==

===Jimmy Wales===

In December 2005, it was noticed that Wikipedia co-founder Jimmy Wales had edited his own Wikipedia entry.  According to public logs, he had edited his biography 18 times, on seven which he altered information about whether Larry Sanger was a co-founder of the online encyclopedia. It was also revealed that Wales had edited the Wikipedia article of his former company, Bomis.  "Bomis Babes", a section of the Bomis website, had been characterized in the article as "soft-core pornography", but Wales revised this to "adult content section" and deleted mentions of pornography.  He said he was fixing an error, and didn't agree with calling Bomis Babes soft porn.
In response to the revelations, Wales conceded that he had made the changes, but maintained that they were technical corrections. Sanger said he was "amused" by the findings: "Having seen edits like this, it does seem that Jimmy is attempting to rewrite history. But this is a futile process because in our brave new world of transparent activity and maximum communication, the truth will out."  Wales commented that, "The point wasn't to write Larry Sanger out of the story. I think Larry doesn't get enough credit."
On the topic of editing articles about oneself, Wales said, "People shouldn't do it, including me...I wish I hadn't done it. It's in poor taste.... People have a lot of information about themselves but staying objective is difficult. That's the trade-off in editing entries about yourself.... If you see a blatant error or misconception about yourself, you really want to set it straight."

===United States Congressional staffers===

In 2006,
In response to the controversy, certain affected IP addresses were temporarily blocked,

===MyWikiBiz===

In August 2006 Gregory Kohs, a market researcher from Pennsylvania, founded MyWikiBiz, a company offering to write inexpensive Wikipedia entries for businesses. stating that "It is strange that a minor Pokemon character will get a 1,200-word article, but a Fortune 500 company will get ... maybe 100 words".  Kohs had also noted the cost of absent articles in a press release he issued from MyWikiBiz: "On an average day, over 6 million different Americans are accessing Wikipedia. I can't fathom how a company's marketing or communications manager can shut off the lights for the night, knowing that his or her organization is missing out on that market of 6 million people - each of them hungry for information."
A few days after the press release, Kohs' Wikipedia account was blocked.  Kohs later recalled a phone call with Jimmy Wales who told him MyWikiBiz was "antithetical" to the mission of the encyclopedia.  Kohs argued that he was editing transparently.  He disagreed with his treatment, and pointed out that Wikipedia has a "Reward Board" (which he had learned of prior to starting his company), a page where people can offer money, gifts, or exchanges to other editors willing to improve articles. The Chronicle of Higher Education noted that the reward board typically involves trades between editors and offers for pay "seem pretty altruistic".  Wales did offer Kohs a compromise: MyWikiBiz.com could create article entries for payment and then release them for Wikipedia editors to copy into the encyclopedia.  That approach was pursued for a few months, but after a change in Wikipedia policy was understood by Kohs to mean that he could now post the drafts to his personal Wikipedia userpage (which Wales had previously told him was not allowed), Wales wrote to Kohs, "Absolutely unacceptable, sorry."  Later, Kohs was indefinitely banned from Wikipedia.  Wales acknowledged that many did in secret what MyWikiBiz was being transparent about but thought accepting the practice was the wrong decision; "It's one thing to acknowledge there's always going to be a little of this, but another to say, 'Bring it on'."  Wales also said that paid editing was "tricky" even for the Reward Board.
Kohs said it surprised him that PR agencies were discouraged from editing articles:  "There are around 130 'Fortune 1,000' companies absent from Wikipedia’s pages...How could they not benefit from a little PR help?" 
Helium.com vice president Andrew Ressler stated that potential Wikipedia editors with "valuable insights and knowledge" are excluded by Wikipedia's position on conflict of interests, leaving behind a small group of entrenched Wikipedians" and questioned the difference between tangible and intangible rewards.
The Pittsburg Post-Gazette commented:  "It's certainly understandable that Wikipedians would want to limit the rubbish they have to sweep away, given that they spend a fair amount of time fighting PR's more nefarious cousin: use of the site to denigrate rivals....But most contributors surely have some personal motivation to dive into a subject, whether it's adoration of "Star Trek" or a soft spot for geraniums.  What's to say contributors who get paid have a harder time sticking to the golden path of neutrality? And doesn't Wikipedia have a built-in defense mechanism -- the swarms of volunteer editors and moderators who can quickly obliterate public-relations fluff, vanity pages and other junk?" 
===Microsoft===

In January 2007, Australian software engineer Rick Jelliffe revealed that Microsoft had offered to pay him to edit Wikipedia articles on two competing code standards, OpenDocumentFormat and Microsoft Office Open XML. Jelliffe, who described himself as a technical expert and not an advocate for Microsoft, that prior efforts to get attention from Wikipedia volunteers had failed, and that Microsoft had agreed that the company would not review Jelliffe's suggested changes.  Microsoft also said they had not previously hired anyone to edit Wikipedia.
Heated debate resulted after the revelation over whether such practices called Wikipedia's credibility into question.  In response to the incident, Jimmy Wales said paying for edits to Wikipedia was against the encyclopedia's spirit.  Wales said the better, more transparent choice would have been for Microsoft to produce a white paper on the subject, post it online, and link to it from Wikipedia.  He also stated "Although agencies and employees should not edit our pages, they do – but perhaps less than you would expect."
Volunteer Wikipedia spokesperson David Gerard said, "Wikipedia tends not to look favorably in terms of conflict of interest, and paying someone is a conflict."  Gerard added that public relations representatives commonly get blocked from editing by Wikipedia administrators.
In the same month that had seen conflict of interest issues raised by both Microsoft and MyWikiBiz, Wales stated that editors should not be paid to edit, and PR agencies would be banned if they persisted.

===WikiScanner===

In 2007, Virgil Griffith, a Caltech computation and neural-systems graduate student, created a searchable database that linked changes made by anonymous Wikipedia editors to companies and organizations from which the changes were made.  The database cross-referenced logs of Wikipedia edits with publicly available records pertaining to the internet IP addresses edits were made from.
Griffith was motivated by the edits from the United States Congress, and wanted to see if others were similarly promoting themselves.  He was particularly interested in finding scandals, especially at large and controversial corporations.  He said he wanted to, "create minor public relations disasters for companies and organizations I dislike (and) to see what 'interesting organizations' (which I am neutral towards) are up to."  He also wanted to give Wikipedia readers a tool to check edits for accuracy and allow the automation and indexing of edits.
Most of the edits Wikiscanner found were minor or harmless, but the site was mined to detect the most controversial and embarrassing instance of conflict of interest edits. Bob Jones University, and Ohio State University.
Although the edits correlated with known IP addresses, there was no proof that the changes actually came from a member of the organization or employee of the company, only that someone had access to their network.
Wikipedia spokespersons received WikiScanner positively, noting that it helped prevent conflicts of interest from influencing articles as well as increasing transparency and mitigating attempts to remove or distort relevant facts.
In 2008 Griffith released an updated version of WikiScanner called WikiWatcher, which also exploited a common mistake made by registered accounts who accidentally forget to log in, revealing their IP address and subsequently their affiliations.

===Bell Pottinger===

In late 2011, a controversy arose around allegations that Bell Pottinger, one of the largest UK-based lobbying and public relations companies, had manipulated articles on behalf of its clients.  Wikipedia editors discovered up to 19 accounts, 10 of which had over 100 edits each, which traced back to Bell Pottinger’s offices. Bell Pottinger was accused of using sock or meatpuppets to edit pages to falsely create the appearance of support for changes in articles. Bell Pottinger admitted that its employees used several accounts to edit Wikipedia articles, but said that the company did not do anything illegal. In response, Wikipedia administrators blocked ten accounts. Analysis of the edits demonstrated that the changes both added positive information and removed negative content, including the removal of information regarding the drug conviction of a businessman and Bell Pottinger client and changing information about the arrest of a man convicted for commercial bribery.
Bell Pottinger's accounts were discovered by blogger and SEO consultant Tim Ireland, The Independent, and the Bureau of Investigative Journalism (BIJ). Undercover BIJ reporters made enquiries while posing as members of the Uzbek government; Bell Pottinger told them that the company offered "sorting" of negative information and criticism on Wikipedia articles as well as other "dark arts."

====Reactions====

Jimmy Wales reacted strongly against the news, calling Bell Pottinger's actions "ethical blindness" that had "embarrassed their clients". Wales said, "I've never seen a case like this. In general when I speak to PR firms they have ethical guidelines that would prevent this kind of conduct." and "That their strongest true response is they didn't break the law tells a lot about their view of the world, I'm afraid...The company committed the cardinal sin of a PR and lobbying company of having their own bad behaviour bring bad headlines to their clients..." The Bell Pottinger Wikipedia article noted this controversy and Wales' comments.
In response to the revelations, James Thomlinson, head of digital at Bell Pottinger said, "We have never added something that is a lie or hasn't been published elsewhere and we have never tried to 'astroturf', ie create fake positive reviews to sell a product. If we have been asked to include things about clients that are untrue we have always said no and pointed to Wikipedia's strict guidelines.... We have also ensured that for every change that we have made we have sought the approval of the wider Wikipedia community first." Lord Bell launched an internal review into the incidents, but he disagreed with Wales' assessment that it reflected badly on the company.  Bell said, "I can't see any bad headlines for our clients...You won't find anybody, including journalists, who doesn't do exactly the same thing."  He also emphasized that if requests were made by clients to post false statements on Wikipedia, they were refused.
The incident raised discussions and debate about the PR industry's role editing Wikipedia.  Jimmy Wales said that the issue was of “great interest” to the encyclopedia.  UK MP Jon Cryer, said: “If Pottinger is going in and editing Wikipedia that would be questionable, the whole idea is that the website is completely open encyclopedia, and it is open to anybody, it has a democratic function...If people who are being paid to represent others are going in and editing, it sounds to me to be at the very least open to question. I would be interested to know how they justify that sort of activity, nobody reading it would be aware of what has happened, people read Wikipedia expecting total objectivity.”
PR Week characterized the issues as being deeper than merely "a nonprofit site - whose mission is 'to empower and engage people around the world to collect and develop educational content' - versus devious spin doctors motivated by filthy lucre." The publication noted that Wikipedia's prominence in Google search results and massive scope makes it "more influential than any newspaper and takes up an increasing amount of effort for anyone managing a reputation".

====Meeting with Jimmy Wales====

In response to the incident, Jimmy Wales made an offer to visit Bell Pottinger to discuss these issues, which was accepted. Wales admitted that there were weaknesses in the site's processes, stating that "Our policy around paid advocates is a bit mushy and we need to tighten it up. It's a bit of a grey area at the moment." Among the major issues discussed was speed.  Lord Bell said, "You can destroy someone's reputation in one minute and it will take years to rebuild." Wales said that anything that was defamatory would be resolved quickly, but noted that in other instances, editors could be faster. Another major issue was transparency; Wales said that all PR professionals clearly state who they are and who their clients are. PR Week noted that similar transparency is not required by editors. Lord Bell said "It's important for Wikipedia to recognise we are a valuable source for accurate information" and that "apparently if you are not-for-profit what you say is true but that if you are a paid-for advocate you are lying." Bell argued that "We don’t become criminals because we are paid. We find that offensive... We’ve done absolutely nothing wrong. We did not make any change that was wrong." Wales was displeased by Bell's stance.  He said, "We’re at an impasse. I’m uncomfortable when you say you have not done anything wrong." He said that being under pressure from clients is not an excuse and "being desperate doesn’t make it right".  Bell did apologise to Wales for anonymously editing without declaring a conflict of interest.
The head of digital at Bell Pottinger admitted to making mistakes, blaming the incident on Wikipedia's “confusing” editing system and “the pressure put on us by clients to remove potentially defamatory or libellous statements very quickly, because Wikipedia is so authoritative.”  Wales admitted that Wikipedia's rules involved "hundreds of pages of policy", but urged Bell Pottinger to seek community input rather than making changes themselves. A large portion of the discussion focused on how to do that within Wikipedia's policies, with a variety of solutions suggested.

===Portland Communications===

In January 2012, British MP Tom Watson discovered that Portland Communications had been removing the nickname of one of its clients' products ("Wife Beater", referring to Anheuser-Busch InBev's Stella Artois beer) from Wikipedia.  Other edits from Portland's offices included changes to articles about another Portland client, the Kazakhstan's BTA Bank, and its former head Mukhtar Ablyazov.  Portland did not deny making the changes, arguing they had been done transparently and in accordance with Wikipedia's policies.

===Newt Gingrich===

Around the beginning of 2012, Joe DeSantis, the campaign communications director for American politician and presidential candidate Newt Gingrich, argued for and made changes to Gingrich's Wikipedia article.  He told the political journalism organization Politico that his approach of working with the Wikipedia community by discussing edits on talk pages to be more successful than making the changes himself.  Wikipedia editor Tvoz was quoted as critical of the practice; he wrote: "... I have to say this micro-managing by a Gingrich campaign director is a matter of concern to me even though you now are identifying yourself. Pointing out factual errors is one thing, but your input should not go beyond that, even a Talk page."

===United Kingdom Parliament===

In March 2012, the Bureau of Investigative Journalism uncovered that UK MPs or their staff had made almost 10,000 edits to the encyclopedia, and that almost one in six MPs had had their Wikipedia article edited from within Parliament.  Former MP Joan Ryan admitted to changing her entry "whenever there’s misleading or untruthful information has been placed on it."  Clare Short said her staff were "angry and protective" over mistakes and criticisms in her Wikipedia article and acknowledged they might have made changes to it. Labour MP Fabian Hamilton also reported having one of his assistants edit a page to make it more accurate in his view.   MP Philip Davies denied making changes about removing controversial comments related to Muslims from 2006 and 2007.

===Other===

In 2007, changes were made about Prince Johan Friso and his wife Princess Mabel of the Netherlands, which could be traced back to their palace.
Another incident, culminated in the banning of an entire organization, the Church of Scientology.
During the 2008 US presidential race, changes made by both Barack Obama and John McCain's campaigns made the news
In June 2011 PR Week reported on a 'fixer', a known but unnamed London-based figure in the PR industry who offered services to 'cleanse' articles.  Wikipedia entries this person was accused of changing included "Carphone Warehouse co-founder David Ross, Von Essen Group chairman Andrew Davis, British property developer David Rowland and billionaire Saudi tycoon Maan Al-Sanea" as well as Edward Stanley, 19th Earl of Derby.  According to PR Week's investigation, 42 edits were made from the same IP address, most of them removing negative or controversial information, or adding positive information.
Edits involving Daimler AG were reported in 2012.

==Public relations industry and Wikipedia community response==

In late 2011 and 2012 the public relations industry—motivated by a desire to clean up their image and change what they viewed as being shut-out from making legitimate edits—began taking organized steps to improve their relationship with the Wikipedia Community.

===Corporate Representatives for Ethical Wikipedia Engagement (CREWE)===

Corporate Representatives for Ethical Wikipedia Engagement (CREWE) is a Facebook group
In a January 4, 2012 open letter to Wikipedia founder Jimmy Wales, Phil Gomes of Edelman, Gomes argued that Wikipedia's prominence as a top search result adds a level of responsibility to be accurate. Gomes also criticized alleged inaccurate or outdated articles and the lack of timely response to issues raised in existing channels.  He further argued that allowing PR representatives to fix minor errors, such as spelling, grammar and facts, leaves too much ambiguity about what are acceptable changes to make.  He made the comparison between PR editors and activists, challenging that activists seem to enjoy "much more latitude".  Finally, Gomes argued that in certain situations direct editing of articles was called for.
According to Gerard F. Corbett, CEO of PRSA, CREWE is based on four principles: 1) Corporate communicators want to do the right thing; 2) Communicators engaged in ethical practice have a lot to contribute; 3) Current Wikipedia policy does not fully understand Nos. 1 and 2, owing to the activities of some bad actors and a general misunderstanding of public relations in general; and 4) Accurate Wikipedia entries are in the public interest.
Among the organization's goals are to get Jimmy Wales to change his opposition to paid editors directly editing articles.
After the group started, conversation on Twitter and elsewhere ensued between group members and Wales.

===The Public Relations Society of America (PRSA) and the Chartered Institute of Public Relations (CIPR)===

The Chartered Institute of Public Relations (CIPR) is a public relations industry group centered in the UK, similar in scope to the Public Relations Society of America (PRSA) in the United States.  CIPR publishes Social Media Guidance, but it was not until the Bell Pottinger and Portland Communications incidents that they began to collaborate directly with the regional UK chapter of the Wikimedia Foundation to provide guidance for CIPR members on how best to interact with the Wikipedia community and its policies.  Both groups have increased their focus on Wikipedia editing since 2011.
CIPR plans to offer education for PR professionals to better follow Wikipedia’s guidelines. Roger Bamkin, chair of Wikimedia UK said, “Recent incidents highlighted by Tom Watson MP and in the national press show that in some parts of the PR profession, a lack of understanding on how to engage with the Wikipedia community persists. We will work with the CIPR to ensure that their members, and through them the wider PR Profession, have access to the clearest possible guidance on the best way to work with Wikipedia. We believe that attempts to mask the true identity of anyone seeking to edit the site are unethical as well as counterproductive.”
CIPR said more work was needed to clarify best practices for changing Wikipedia articles. CIPR Policy and communications officer, Andrew Ross, emphasized the two way relationship of the project: 'We want Wikipedia to understand the role of communications and why communications professionals want to access the site and use it in a transparent way,' he said.
Jane Wilson, CIPR CEO reasoned for a collaborative approach: Stella Artois is on the "wife-beater" page because it is a nick-name in common currency for that brand of strong continental lager. The brand managers who want to change this have a wider repetitional issue to address, editing the term from a Wikipedia page will not get rid of this association...Ethical public relations professionals work in the public interest and have a contribution to make. What is needed is a widespread understanding and acceptance of the most appropriate way for public relations professionals to go about this.  For the time being, we may have to start with an acceptance that Wikipedians have a problem with our profession and this reputation has unfortunately been earned. We can't change this overnight but by working in partnership with Wikimedia UK and Wikipedians, through outreach, diplomacy and dialogue, we can make a difference.
Portland Communications welcomed CIPR's announcement of collaboration with Wikipedia and invited Jimmy Wales to speak to their company, as he did at Bell Pottinger.  MP Tom Watson, who revealed the Portland incident was optimistic about the collaboration: "PR professionals need clear guidelines in this new world of online-information-sharing. That's why I am delighted that interested parties are coming together to establish a clear code of conduct."
PRSA head Gerald Corbett argued for greater permissions and access to Wikipedia:  "We believe there is a case to be made for PR professionals to responsibly edit client Wikipedia entries in an ethical and transparent manner... An accurate Wikipedia entry serves the public interest far better than inaccurate entries that are allowed to languish with errors because Wikipedia editors refuse to allow 'paid advocates' to make necessary, accurate changes. A disclosure of one’s professional affiliation with a business should not automatically exempt him or her from being allowed to responsibly edit Wikipedia entries. Greater accuracy and transparency within Wikipedia entries should be the basis of how Wikipedia goes about its practices... PRSA certainly does not condone behavior on the part of public relations people or PR firms that is unethical or dishonest in respect to their editing of clients’ Wikipedia entries. To be sure, there are some who wish to abuse the system... But on the whole, we believe that PR professionals, particularly those whose work adheres to the PRSA Code of Ethics, are responsible and respectful of the online communities in which they engage and seek to influence...Our position on this matter is simple: it's wrong for the PR profession to think it can run roughshod over the established Wikipedia community. PR professionals must engage with it in a reasonable manner that respects the community’s rules and protocols, while also ensuring they are acting in their clients' best interests. But the engagement should be a two-way street in which Wikipedia is willing to see and accommodate both sides of the issue. At the moment, we do not believe that to be the case. 
===WikiProject Cooperation===

In 2012 an on-Wikipedia effort called WikiProject Cooperation was started to address issues relating to paid and conflict of interest.[ref]
</ref> The group is made up of both paid editors and regular Wikipedia editors, and it is designed to help deal with the complexity and controversy surrounding conflict of interest editing.<ref name=cooperation/>  The group "facilitates collaboration with editors paid to edit Wikipedia...[providing] education and outreach to Public Relations and Marketing professionals, freelance editors, and employees working on assignments from their employers" with the goal of "support[ing] ethical, transparent paid editors that opt-in to collaborative efforts to meet Wikipedia's encyclopedic goals, serve the public's interest and avoid even the perception of impropriety."<ref name="wikiprojecto">[[Wikipedia:WikiProject Cooperation]]</ref>  The main avenue for accomplishing its goals is a Paid Editor Help page where paid editors and representatives can requests changes to an article and have it reviewed by an experienced editor.<ref name="wikiprojecto"/>  Rather than take a strong stance for or against paid editing, WikiProject Cooperation takes a "conciliatory approach", encouraging paid editors to be "polite, civil and humble".<ref name=cooperation/>  It echoes COI policy in strongly discouraging paid editors from making direct edits to articles.<ref name=cooperation/>

==See also==

* Reliability of Wikipedia

==External links==

* A 2006 article in Wikipedia's community newspaper about paid editing
* A 2009 article in Wikipedia's community newspaper about paid editing
* A 2009 community discussion about paid editing

==References==


