
Criticism of Google includes possible misuse and manipulation of search results, its use of others' intellectual property, concerns that its compilation of data may violate people's privacy, censorship of search results and content, and the energy consumption of its servers as well as concerns over traditional business issues such as antitrust, monopoly, and restraint of trade.
Google Inc. is an American multinational public corporation invested in Internet search, cloud computing, and advertising technologies. Google hosts and develops a number of Internet-based services and products,See: List of Google products. and generates profit primarily from advertising through its AdWords program. Google's stated mission is "to organize the world's information and make it universally accessible and useful";Google Corporate Page, accessed October 17, 2011 this mission, and the means used to accomplish it, have raised concerns among the company's critics. Much of the criticism pertains to issues that have not yet been addressed by cyber law.

==Page rank==

=== Possible misuse of search results ===

In 2007, a group of Austrian researchers observed a tendency to misuse the Google engine as a "reality interface". Ordinary users as well as journalists tend to rely on the first pages of Google search, assuming that everything not listed there is either not important or merely does not exist. The researchers say that "Google has become the main interface for our whole reality. To be precise: with the Google interface the user gets the impression that the search results imply a kind of totality. In fact, one only sees a small part of what one could see if one also integrates other research tools".Report on dangers an d opportunities posed by large search engines, particularly Google, H. Maurer (Ed), Graz University of Technology, Austria, September 30, 2007, 187 pp.

=== Danger of page rank manipulation ===

The page ranking algorithm of Google can and has been manipulated for political and humorous reasons. To illustrate the view that Google's search engine could be subjected to manipulation, Google Watch implemented a Google bomb by linking the phrase "out-of-touch executives" to Google's own page on its corporate management. The attempt was mistakenly attributed to disgruntled Google employees by The New York Times, which later printed a correction.
A group of Austrian researchers said in 2007 that page rank can be influenced by individual views of the Google staff: "it became clear that not only mathematical algorithms and software, but also human brains in the Google headquarters will edit information processed by Google and decide what will go online and in which form."
Daniel Brandt started the Google Watch website and has criticized Google's PageRank algorithms, saying that they discriminate against new websites and favor established sites.
Chris Beasley started Google Watch Watch and disagrees, saying that Mr. Brandt overstates the amount of discrimination that new websites face and that new websites will naturally rank lower when the ranking is based on a site's "reputation". In Google's world a site's reputation is in part determined by how many and which other sites link to it (links from sites with a "better" reputation of their own carry more weight). Since new sites will seldom be as heavily linked as older more established sites, they aren't as well known, won't have as much of a reputation, and will receive a lower page ranking."Why Daniel Brandt doesn't like Google PageRank", Chris Beasley, Google Watch Watch, accessed October 18, 2011
In testimony before a U.S. Senate antitrust panel in September 2011, Jeffrey Katz, the chief executive of NexTag, said that Google’s business interests conflict with its engineering commitment to an open-for-all Internet and that: "Google doesn’t play fair. Google rigs its results, biasing in favor of Google Shopping and against competitors like us." Jeremy Stoppelman, the chief of Yelp, said sites like his have to cooperate with Google because it is the gateway to so many users and "Google then gives its own product preferential treatment." In earlier testimony at the same hearing Eric Schmidt, Google's chairman, said that Google does not "cook the books" to favor its own products and services."Google’s Competitors Square Off Against Its Leader", Steve Lohr, New York Times, September 21, 2011

===Page ranking related lawsuits===

In 2006, the parental advice Internet site Kinderstart.com sued Google for setting its Page rank to zero, claiming that the reset caused the site to lose 70 percent of its audience. In this lawsuit, it was stated, that "Google does not generally inform Web sites that they have been penalized nor does it explain in detail why the Web site was penalized"."KinderStart sues Google over Pageranks!", Reuters via CNN, March 19, 2006  Kinderstart claimed that they were penalized for being a Google competitor (setting up the search engine). Kinderstart has formally lost the process (while their rank seems to be no longer zero). Google Incorporated claims that allowing one to win such process would set a dangerous precedent, encouraging other penalized sites to protest as well.
Numerous companies and individuals, for example, MyTriggers.com  have voiced concerns regarding the fairness of Google's PageRank and search results after their web sites disappeared from Google's first-page results.  In the case of MyTriggers.com, the Ohio-based shopping comparison search site accused Google of favoring its own services in search results (although the judge eventually ruled that the site failed to show harm to other similar businesses).

==Copyright issues==

=== Google Print, Books, and Library ===

Google's ambitious plans to scan millions of books and make them readable through its search engine have been criticized for copyright violations."France to oppose Google book scheme", Stanley Pignal, Financial Times, September 8, 2009 The Association for Learned and Professional Society Publishers and the Association of American University Presses have both issued statements strongly opposing Google Print, stating that "Google, an enormously successful company, claims a sweeping right to appropriate the property of others for its own commercial use unless it is told, case by case and instance by instance, not to.""Google Print Faces More Opposition", Keith Regan, E-Commerce Times, August 30, 2005
On September 20, 2005, the Authors Guild, a group that represents 8,000 U.S. authors, filed a class action suit in federal court in Manhattan against Google over its unauthorized scanning and copying of books through its Google Library program. Google responded that its use was a fair use because they were only showing "snippets" for books where they did not have permission from a rightsholder In the Spring of 2006 the parties began negotiations in hopes of settling the lawsuit.
On October 28, 2008, Google announced a proposed agreement with the Authors Guild and the Association of American Publishers in which Google would pay $125 million to settle the lawsuit. 
Following a Fairness Hearing in February, on March 22, 2011 supervising judge Denny Chin issued a ruling rejecting the settlement.Authors Guild et. al. v. Google, Inc., no. 05-8136 (S.D.N.Y. March 22, 2011), order. Chin urged that the settlement be revised from "opt-out" to "opt-in" and set a date for a "status conference" at which to discuss next steps.Page, Benedicte, "New York judge rules against Google books settlement", The Guardian, Wednesday March 23, 2011Google Book Settlement Status Conference Begins and Ends in a Matter of Minutes As of mid-September 2011 settlement discussions were continuing, but a discovery and briefing schedule was also established that would bring the case to a hearing sometime in the second half of 2012, if a settlement is not reached before then."Update on Google Books Settlement", Mary Rasenberger, The Entertainment, Arts and Sports Law Blog, New York State Bar Association, September 19, 2011
In another controversy, a Chinese writer Mian Mian filed a lawsuit against the company, for scanning her entire novel without notifying her or paying her for copyright permission, in December 2009.
Also, in November of the same year, the China Written Works Copyright Society (CWWCS), which protects Chinese writers' copyrights, accused Google of scanning 18,000 books by 570 Chinese writers without authorization, for its library, Google Books. 
Google agreed on November 20 to provide a list of Chinese books it had scanned, but the company refused to admit having "infringed" copyright laws.http://www.chinadaily.com.cn/china/2009-12/16/content_9184029.htm

===Cached data===

Kazaa  and the Church of Scientology have used the Digital Millennium Copyright Act to demand that Google remove references to allegedly copyrighted material on their sites."Google Pulls P2P Links Over Kazaa Copyright Claims", Jay Lyman, TechNewsWorld, September 2, 2003]
The New York Times has complained that the caching of their content during a web crawl, a feature utilized by search engines including Google Web Search, violates copyright."Google cache raises copyright concerns", Stefanie Olsen, CNET News, July 9, 2003 Google observes Internet standard mechanisms for requesting that caching be disabled via the robots.txt file, which is another mechanism that allows operators of a website to request that part or all of their site not be included in search engine results, or via META tags, which allow a content editor to specify whether a document can be crawled or archived, or whether the links on the document can be followed. The U.S. District Court of Nevada ruled that Google's caches do not constitute copyright infringement under American law in Field v. Google and Parker v. Google."Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law, Blake A. Field vs. Google, Inc., No. CV-S-04-0413-RCJ-LRL", Judge Robert C. Jones, United States District Court (District of Nevada), January 12, 2006Memorandum & Order, Gordon Roy Parker v. Google, Inc., No. 04-CV-3918, Judge R. Barclay Surrick, United States District Court (Eastern District of Pennsylvania), March 10, 2006

===Google Map Maker===

Google Map Maker allows user contributed data to be put into the Google Maps service,Google Map Maker similar to OpenStreetMap it includes concepts such as organising mapping parties and mapping for humanitarian efforts."We Need to Stop Google’s Exploitation of Open Communities", Mikel Maron, April 11, 2011. It has been criticised for taking work done for free by the general public and claiming commercial ownership of it without returning any contributions back to the commonsGoogle Map Maker - OpenStreeMap Wiki as their restrictive license makes it incompatible with most open projects by preventing commercial use or use by competitive services."Why Google MapMaker is not Open", Mikel Maron, March 16, 2010.

==Privacy==

Google's March 1, 2012 privacy change enables the company to share data across a wide variety of services.  
After privacy concerns were raised, Google's CEO, Eric Schmidt, declared: "If you have something that you don't want anyone to know, maybe you shouldn't be doing it in the first place. If you really need that kind of privacy, the reality is that search engines—including Google—do retain this information for some time and it's important, for example, that we are all subject in the United States to the Patriot Act and it is possible that all that information could be made available to the authorities."
Privacy International has raised concerns regarding the dangers and privacy implications of having a centrally-located, widely popular data warehouse of millions of Internet users' searches, and how under controversial existing U.S. law, Google can be forced to hand over all such information to the U.S. government. In its 2007 Consultation Report, Privacy International ranked Google as "Hostile to Privacy", its lowest rating on their report, making Google the only company in the list to receive that ranking."Consultation Report: Race to the Bottom? 2007", Privacy International, June 9, 2007

===Potential for data disclosure===

====Data leaks====

On 10 March 2009, Google reported, for example, that a bug in Google Docs had allowed unintended access to some private documents. It was believed that 0.05% of all documents stored via the service were affected by the bug.  Google claims the bug has now been fixed.Google software bug shared private online documents, AFP, 10 March 2009

====Cookies====

Google, like most search engines, places a cookie, which can be used to track a person's search history, on each registered user's computer.  Google uses the cookies to maintain user preferences between sessions and offer other search features. Originally the cookie did not expire until 2038, although it could be manually deleted by the user or refused by setting a browser preference. As of 2007, Google's cookie expired in two years, but renewed itself whenever a Google service is used. And more recently Google anonymizes its IP data after 9 months and its cookies after 18 months."Privacy FAQ", Google, accessed October 16, 2011 
There is no evidence that Google shares this information with law enforcement or other government agencies, though some users remain anxious about the possibility.

====Tracking====

Google has been suspected to collect and aggregate data of internet users through the various tools provided to developers, such as Google analytics, Google Web fonts and Google APIs. This might allow to figure out a user's route through internet by storing its IP on each site (cross-domain web tracking). Linked to other information made available through Google APIs, which are widely used, Google might be able to provide a quite complete web user profile linked to an IP. This kind of data is invaluable for marketing agencies, and for Google itself to increase the efficiency of its own marketing/advertising activities.
Google is encouraging developers to use their tools and actively encouraging developers to communicate end-user IP's to Google (https://developers.google.com/web-search/docs/):
"''Developers are also encouraged to make use of the userip parameter to supply the IP address of the end-user on whose behalf you are making the API request. Doing so will help distinguish this legitimate server-side traffic from traffic which doesn't come from an end-user."

====Gmail====

Steve Ballmer,Microsoft's Ballmer: Google Reads Your Mail ChannelWeb, October 2007 Liz Figueroa,"Google's Gmail could be blocked", BBC News, April 13, 2004 Mark Rasch,"Google Gmail: Spook Heaven", Mark Rasch, The Register, June 15, 2004 and the editors of Google Watch believe the processing of email message content by Google's Gmail service goes beyond proper use. Google Inc. claims that mail sent to or from Gmail is never read by a human being other than the account holder, and content that is read by computers is only used to improve the relevance of advertisements."Privacy Policy", Google Privacy Center] 
The privacy policies of other popular email services, like Hotmail and Yahoo, allow users' personal information to be collected and utilized for advertising purposes.Yahoo Privacy PolicyMicrosoft Privacy Policy

====Possible ties to the CIA and NSA====

In February 2010 Google was reported to be working on an agreement with the NSA to investigate recent attacks against its network. And, while the deal did not give NSA access to Google's data on users’ searches or e-mail communications and accounts and Google was not sharing proprietary data with the agency, privacy and civil rights advocates were concerned."Google Asks NSA to Help Secure Its Network", Kim Zetter, Wired, February 4, 2010"‘Don’t Be Evil,’ Meet ‘Spy on Everyone’: How the NSA Deal Could Kill Google", Noah Shachtman, Wired, February 4, 2010 
In October 2004 Google acquired Keyhole, a 3D mapping company. In February 2004, before its acquisition by Google, Keyhole received an investment from In-Q-Tel, the CIA's investment arm."Google buys CIA-backed mapping startup", Andrew Orlowski, The Register, October 28, 2004 And in July 2010 it was reported that the investment arms of both the CIA (In-Q-Tel) and Google (Google Ventures) were investing in Recorded Future, a company specializing in predictive analytics—monitoring the web in real time and using that information to predict the future. And, while private corporations have been using similar systems since the 1990s, the involvement of Google and the CIA with their large data stores raises privacy concerns."Google, CIA Invest in ‘Future’ of Web Monitoring", Noah Shachtman, Wired, July 28, 2010"Google and CIA Invest in a Minority Report-Like Technology That May Make Our World a Less Certain Place", Bob Jacobson, Huffington Post, July 30, 2010
In 2011, a federal district court judge in the United States turned down a Freedom of Information Act request, submitted by the Electronic Privacy Information Center. In May 2012, a Court of Appeals upheld the ruling. The request attempted to disclose NSA records regarding the 2010 cyber-attack on Google users in China. The NSA stated that revealing such information would make the US Government information systems vulnerable to attack. The NSA refused to confirm or deny the existence of the records, or the existence of any relationship between the NSA and Google.

====Government requests====

Google has been criticized for both disclosing too much information to governments too quickly and for not disclosing information that governments need to enforce their laws. In April 2010, Google, for the first time, released details about how often countries around the world ask it to hand over user data or to censor information."Google reveals government data requests and censorship", Maggie Shiels, BBC News, April 20, 2010 Online tools make the updated data available to everyone."Government Requests", Google Transparency Report, accessed October 18, 2011 
For the period between July and December 2009 Brazil topped the list for user data requests with 3,663, while the US made 3,580, the UK 1,166, and India 1,061. Brazil also made the largest number of requests to remove content with 291, followed by Germany with 188, India with 142, and the US with 123. Google, who stopped offering search services in China a month before the data was released, said it could not release information on requests from the Chinese government because such information is regarded as a state secret.
Google's chief legal officer said, "The vast majority of these requests are valid and the information needed is for legitimate criminal investigations or for the removal of child pornography".

===Street View===

Google's online map service, "Street View" has been accused of taking pictures and viewing too far into people's private homes and/or too close to people on the street when they do not know they are being photographed."EFF lawyer is smokin' on Google Street View", Dan Goodin, The Register, June 13, 2007"All-seeing Google Street View prompts privacy fears", Times Online, June 1, 2007

====Surveillance of WiFi networks====

As it set out to photograph neighborhoods around the world as part of its Street View program, Google equipped its vehicles with antenna as well as cameras so it could create a database with the names of Wi-Fi networks and the coding of Wi-Fi routers. Google collected about 600 gigabytes of data from users of public WiFi stations (which are not owned by Google) during 2006–2010, including snippets of private data such as e-mail. No disclosures or privacy policy was given to those affected or to the owners of the WiFi stations, in more than 30 countries."Google grabs personal info off of Wi-Fi networks", Michael Liedtke, AP, May 14, 14, 2010 
Google apologized, said they were "acutely aware that we failed badly here" in terms of privacy protection, that they were not aware of the problem until an inquiry from German regulators was received, that the private data was collected inadvertently, and that none of the private data was used in Google's search engine or other services. A representative of Consumer Watchdog replied, "Once again, Google has demonstrated a lack of concern for privacy. Its computer engineers run amok, push the envelope and gather whatever data they can until their fingers are caught in the cookie jar." In a sign that legal penalties may result, Google said it will not destroy the data until permitted by regulators."Google grabs personal info off of Wi-Fi networks", Michael Liedtke (AP), Yahoo! Finance, May 14, 2010

===Google Buzz===

On February 9, 2010, Google launched Google Buzz, Google's microblogging service. Anyone with a Gmail account was automatically added as a contact to pre-existing Gmail contacts, and had to opt out if they did not wish to participate.
The launch of Google Buzz as an "opt-out" social network immediately drew criticism for violating user privacy because it automatically allowed Gmail users' contacts to view their other contacts."Google's Buzz 'Has Serious Privacy Flaws'", Roddy Mansfield, Sky News Online, February 12, 2010

===Google+ and Nymwars===

Google+ requires users to identify themselves using their real names, and accounts may be suspended when this requirement is not met."Google+ Identity Crisis: What’s at Stake With Real Names and Privacy", Tim Carmody, Wired, July 26, 2011 Critics point out that pseudonymous speech has played a critical role throughout history and feel that the Google+ policy deprives some people of an important privacy protection tool."A Case for Pseudonyms", Jillian C. York, Electronic Frontier Foundation, July 29, 2011 
On October 19, 2011, at the Web 2.0 Summit, Google executive Vic Gundotra revealed that Google+ will begin supporting pseudonyms and other types of identity within a few months."Victory! Google Surrenders in the Nymwars", Eva Galperin and Jillian C. York, Electronic Frontier Foundation, October 19, 2011

===YouTube and Viacom===

On July 14, 2008, Viacom compromised to protect YouTube users' personal data in their $1 billion copyright lawsuit. Google agreed it will anonymize user information and internet protocol addresses from its YouTube subsidiary before handing the data over to Viacom. The privacy deal also applied to other litigants including the FA Premier League, the Rodgers & Hammerstein organization and the Scottish Premier League."Lawyers in YouTube lawsuit reach user privacy deal", Eric Auchard, Reuters, July 15, 2008"Google and Viacom reach deal over YouTube user data", Mark Sweney, The Guardian, July 15, 2008 The deal however did not extend the anonymity to employees, because Viacom wishes to prove that Google staff are aware of the uploading of illegal material to the site. The parties therefore will further meet on the matter lest the data be made available to the court."Viacom backs down over YouTube lawsuit", Fiona Ramsay, Media Week, July 15, 2008]

===Privacy and data protection cases and issues by state===

====European Union====

European Union (EU) data protection officials (the Article 29 working party who advise the EU on privacy policy) have written to Google asking the company to justify its policy of keeping information on individuals' internet searches for up to two years. The letter questioned whether Google has "fulfilled all the necessary requirements" on the EU laws concerning data protection."EU probes Google grip on data", Maija Palmer, Financial Times, May 24, 2007 

====Czech Republic====

Starting in 2010, after more than 5 months of unsuccessful negotiations with Google the Czech Office for Personal Data Protection has prevented Street View from taking pictures of new locations. The Office described Google’s program as taking pictures “beyond the extent of the ordinary sight from a street”, and claimed that it “disproportionately invaded citizens’ privacy.”"Czech Republic stops Google from further Street View photography", Cyrus Farivar (Reuters), Deutsche Welle, September 15, 2010"Czech Republic blocks Google’s data mapping feature", J.G. Enriquez, Seer Press News, September 25, 2010

====Germany====

In May 2010 Google was unable to meet a deadline set by Hamburg's data protection supervisor to hand over data illegally collected from unsecured home wireless networks. Google added, “We hope, given more time, to be able to resolve this difficult issue.""Google refuses to give up 'illegal' data", Press TV, May 27, 2010 The data was turned over to German, French, and Spanish authorities in early June 2010."Google Relents, Will Hand Over European Wi-Fi Data", Robert McMillan, PC World/IDG News, June 3, 2010
In November 2010, vandals in Germany targeted houses that had opted out of Google's Street View."German vandals target Street View opt-out homes", BBC News, November 24, 2010.
In April 2011 Google announced that it will not expand its Street View program in Germany, but what has already been shot–around 20 cities' worth of pictures–will remain available. This decision came in spite of an earlier Berlin State Supreme Court ruling that Google's Street View program was legal."Google Abandons Street View in Germany", David Murphy, PC Magazine, April 10, 2011

====Italy====

Google-Vividown: in February 2010, three Google executives were handed six-month suspended sentences for breach of the Italian Personal Data Protection Code. "Caso Google-Vividown: un bel saggio che deve far riflettere" ("Google case-Vividown: a good essay that should give pause"), Guido Scorza, May 16, 2010 (English translation)"The Italian Google-Case: Privacy, Freedom of Speech and Responsibility of Providers for User-Generated Contents", Giovanni Sartor and Mario Viola de Azevedo Cunha, International Journal of Law and Information Technology, Vol. 18 No. 4 (Winter 2010), pp. 356–378

====Norway====

The Data Inspectorate of Norway (Norway is not a member of the EU) has investigated Google (and others) and has stated that the 18- to 24-month period for retaining data proposed by Google was too long."Google Data on Users May Break EU Law, Watchdog Says", Stephanie Bodoni, Bloomberg, May 25, 2007

====United States====

In early 2005, the United States Department of Justice filed a motion in federal court to force Google to comply with a subpoena for, "the text of each search string entered onto Google's search engine over a two-month period (absent any information identifying the person who entered such query).""ACLU v. Alberto R. Gonzales." United States District Court (Northern District of California). August 25, 2005. Retrieved on April 13, 2007. Google fought the subpoena, due to concerns about users' privacy.Wong, Nicole. "Response to the DOJ Motion." Google. February 17, 2006. Retrieved on April 13, 2007. In March 2006, the court ruled partially in Google's favor, recognizing the privacy implications of turning over search terms and refusing to grant access.Broache, Anne. "Judge: Google must give feds limited access to records." CNET. March 17, 2006. Retrieved on April 13, 2007.
In April 2008 a Pittsburgh couple, Aaron and Christine Boring, sued Google for "invasion of privacy". They claimed that Street View made a photo of their home available online, and it diminished the value of their house, which was purchased for its privacy. 
In May 2010 a U.S. District Court in Portland, Oregon ordered Google to hand over two copies of wireless data that the company's Street View program collected as it photographed neighborhoods.

===Do Not Track===

In April 2011, Google was criticized for not signing onto the Do Not Track feature for Chrome that is being incorporated in most other modern web browsers, including Firefox, Internet Explorer, Safari, and Opera. Critics pointed out that a new patent Google was granted in April 2011, for greatly enhanced user tracking through web advertising, will provide much more detailed information on user behavior and that do not track would hurt Google's ability to exploit this. Software reviewer Kurt Bakke of Conceivably Tech wrote: "Google said that it intends charge
Google argued that the technology is useless at the present time, as advertisers are not required to obey the user's tracking preference and as it remains unclear as to what constitutes tracking (as opposed to storing statistical data or user preferences). As an alternative, Google offers an extension called "Keep My Opt-Outs", which permanently bars ad companies from installing cookies on the user's computer.
The reaction to this extension was mixed. Paul Thurrott of Windows IT Pro called the extension "much, much closer to what I've been asking for—i.e. something that just works and doesn't require the user to figure anything out—than the IE or Firefox solutions" while lamenting the fact that the extension is not included as part of the browser itself.
In February 2012, Google announced that Chrome will incorporate a Do Not Track feature, by the end of 2012.

==Censorship==

Google has been criticized for various instances of censoring its search results, many times in compliance with the laws of various countries, most notably when it operated in China from Jan 2006 to March 2010.

===Web search===

In the United States, Google commonly censors search results to comply with Digital Millennium Copyright Act-related legal complaints,"Keyword: Google and the DMCA", Chilling Effects Clearinghouse such as in 2002 when Google censored websites that provided information critical of Scientology.
In the United Kingdom, it was reported that Google had 'delisted' Inquisition 21st century, a website which claims to challenge moral authoritarian and sexually absolutist ideas in the United Kingdom. Google later released a press statement suggesting Inquisition 21 had attempted to manipulate search results.
As of January 26, 2011, Google's Auto Complete feature will not complete certain words such as "bittorrent", "torrent", "utorrent", "megaupload" and "rapidshare"."Google Starts Censoring BitTorrent, RapidShare and More", Torrent Freak, January 26, 2011 In addition, swears and pornographic words are not completed. However, they are not censored from actual search results.

===China===

Until March 2010, Google adhered to the Internet censorship policies of China, enforced by filters colloquially known as "The Great Firewall of China". Google.cn search results were filtered to remove some results concerning the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989, sites supporting the independence movements of Tibet and Taiwan, the Falun Gong movement, and other information perceived to be harmful to the People's Republic of China (PRC). Google claimed that some censorship is necessary in order to keep the Chinese government from blocking Google entirely, as occurred in 2002.The Great Wall: China Against the World, 1000 BC–AD 2000, Julia Lovell, Grove/Atlantic, March 2007, ISBN 978-0-8021-4297-9 The company claims it did not plan to give the government information about users who search for blocked content, and will inform users that content has been restricted if they attempt to search for it."Google move 'black day' for China." BBC News. January 25, 2006. As of 2009, Google was the only major China-based search engine to explicitly inform the user when search results are blocked or hidden.
Some Chinese Internet users were critical of Google for assisting the Chinese government in repressing its own citizens, particularly those dissenting against the government and advocating for human rights."Google: Stop participating in China's Propaganda", Students for a Free Tibet, Yahoo! Groups, February 1, 2006 Furthermore, Google had been denounced and called hypocritical by Free Media Movement for agreeing to China's demands while simultaneously fighting the United States government's requests for similar information. Google China had also been condemned by Reporters Without Borders, Human Rights Watch"3. Google, Inc." in “Race to the Bottom”: Corporate Complicity in Chinese Internet Censorship, Part IV. How Multinational Internet Companies assist Government Censorship in China, Human Rights Watch, Vol. 18 No. 8(C), August 2006 and Amnesty International."Google does not censor: take action to defend freedom of information", Amnesty International, May 10, 2006
In 2009, China Central Television, Xinhua News Agency, People's Daily reported Google's "dissemination of obscene information", People's Daily claimed that "Google's 'don't be evil' motto becomes a fig leaf". (English translation)
However, on January 12, 2010, in response to an apparent hacking of Google's servers in an attempt to access information about Chinese dissidents, Google announced that “we are no longer willing to continue censoring our results on Google.cn, and so over the next few weeks we will be discussing with the Chinese government the basis on which we could operate an unfiltered search engine within the law, if at all.”"A new approach to China", David Drummond, SVP, Corporate Development and Chief Legal Officer, Official Google Blog, January 12, 2010 On March 22, 2010, after talks with Chinese authorities failed to reach an agreement, the company redirected its censor-complying Google China service to its Google Hong Kong service, which is outside the jurisdiction of Chinese censorship laws.  However, at least as of March 23, 2010, "The Great Firewall" continues to censor search results from the Hong Kong portal, www.google.com.hk (as it does with the US portal, www.google.com) for controversial terms such as "Falun gong" and "the June 4 incident" (Tiananmen Square incident).A new approach to China: an update", David Drummond, SVP, Corporate Development and Chief Legal Officer, Official Google Blog, March 22, 2010

===AdSense/AdWords===

In August 2008, Google closed the AdSense account of a site that carried a negative view of Scientology, the second closing of such a site within 3 months."Google murders second Anonymous AdSense account", Cade Metz, The Register, August 15, 2008 It is not certain if the account revocations actually were on the grounds of anti-religious content, however the cases have raised questions about Google's terms in regards to AdSense/AdWords.  The AdSense policy defines that "Sites displaying Google ads may not include ... advocacy against any individual, group, or organization","Google AdSense Program Policies", AdSense Help, Google Inc. which allows Google to revoke the above mentioned AdSense accounts.
In May 2011, Google cancelled the AdWord advertisement purchased by a Dublin sex worker rights group named "Turn Off the Blue Light" (TOBL),Turn Off the Blue Light, website claiming that it represented an "egregious violation" of company ad policy by "selling adult sexual services". However, TOBL is a nonprofit campaign for sex worker rights and is not advertising or selling adult sexual services.

===YouTube===

YouTube is a video sharing website acquired by Google in 2006.  YouTube's Terms of Service prohibits the posting of videos which violate copyrights or depict pornography, illegal acts, gratuitous violence, or hate speech. User-posted videos that violate such terms may be removed and replaced with a message stating: "This video has been removed due to terms of use violation".
YouTube has been criticized by national governments for failing to police content. For example, videos  have been criticality accused for being "left up", among other videos featuring unwarranted violence or strong ill-intend against people who probably didn't want this to be published.  In 2006, Thailand blocked access to YouTube for users with Thai IP addresses. Thai authorities identified 20 offensive videos and demanded that YouTube remove them before it would unblock any YouTube content. In 2007 a Turkish judge ordered access to YouTube blocked because of content that insulted Mustafa Kemal Ataturk, a crime under Turkish law. On February 22, 2008, Pakistan Telecommunications Authority (PTA) attempted to block regional access to YouTube following a government order. The attempt inadvertently caused a worldwide YouTube blackout that took 2 hours to correct. Four days later, PTA lifted the ban after YouTube removed controversial religious comments made by a Dutch Member of Parliament"Pakistan Drops YouTube Ban", CBS News/AP, February 11, 2009 concerning Islam."Pakistan welcomes back YouTube", Greg Sandoval, CNET News Blogs, February 26, 2008
YouTube has also been criticized by its users for attempting to censor content. In November 2007, the account of Wael Abbas, a well known Egyptian activist who posted videos of police brutality, voting irregularities and anti-government demonstrations, was blocked for three days."YouTube stops account of Egypt anti-torture activist", Cynthia Johnston, Reuters, November 27, 2007
In February 2008, a video produced by the American Life League that accused a Planned Parenthood television commercial of promoting recreational sex was removed, then reinstated two days later. In October, a video by stand-up comic Pat Condell criticizing the British government for officially sanctioning sharia law courts in Britain was removed, then reinstated two days later. In response, his fans uploaded copies of the video themselves, and the National Secular Society wrote to YouTube in protest.
YouTube also pulled a video of columnist Michelle Malkin showing violence by Muslim extremists.
YouTube censors videos by country on its site. For example, videos from certain countries are blocked from being viewed in the United States and other countries on copyright grounds. But some users allege that is  blatant censorship by YouTube because it forbids users from viewing the videos that they want to see. YouTube has received numerous criticisms for blocking videos containing content from certain entertainment companies. YouTube has been criticized for heavy-handed censorship. Some allege that this censorship is xenophobic because it blocks people from enjoying foreign works because they lived in a foreign country where the content has been blocked.

==Monopoly, restraint of trade, and antitrust==

According to Joe Wilcox of Microsoft-Watch Google has increased its dominance of search, becoming an information gatekeeper despite the conflict of interest between information gathering and the advertising surrounding that information. His colleagues do not share the same view. 
In the case of the now-defunct Google-Yahoo! deal of 2008 – a pact for Google to sell advertising on Yahoo! search pages – the U.S. Department of Justice found that the deal would be "materially reducing important competitive rivalry between the two companies" and would violate the Sherman Antitrust Act.

===Alternatives to Google and monopoly power===

In testimony before a U.S. Senate antitrust panel in September 2011, Eric Schmidt, Google's chairman, said that “the Internet is the ultimate level playing field" where users were "one click away" from competitors. Beyond the existence of alternatives, Google's large market share was another aspect of the debate, as this exchange between Senator Herb Kohl and Mr. Schmidt at the September Senate hearing illustrates:"Is Google A Monopoly? 'We're In That Area,' Admits Schmidt", Matt Rosoff, Business Insider, September 21, 2011
:Senator Kohl asked: "But you do recognize that in the words that are used and antitrust kind of oversight, your market share constitutes monopoly, dominant – special power dominant for a monopoly firm. You recognize you're in that area?"
:Schmidt replied: "I would agree, sir, that we’re in that area.... I'm not a lawyer, but my understanding of monopoly findings is this is a judicial process."
Being a monopoly or having monopoly power isn't illegal in the United States. It depends on whether that power is used in ways that violate the special rules that apply to monopolies."Competition law does not make merely having a monopoly illegal, but rather abusing the power a monopoly may confer, for instance through exclusionary practices" from the Law section of the Wikipedia article on Monopoly, accessed November 11, 2011

==Other==

===Blocking===

Google has been known to block and remove various blogs, Adsense as well as Youtube accounts of users who are known to have voiced anti-Google opinions in various Google related-forums as well as other places on the Internet. Many AdSense users have also suffered heavy losses due to their accounts being unfairly frozen by Google just before them getting paid, citing "unfair means" whereas they claim to have used no such methods to gain extra money.

===Energy consumption===

Google has been criticized for the high amount of energy used to maintain its servers"Keyword: Evil", Ginger Strand, Harpers Magazine, March 2008, but was praised by Green Peace for the use of renewable source of energy to run them.Online Cloud Services Rely on Coal or Nuclear Power, Report Says, New York Times  Google has pledged to spend millions of dollars to investigate cheap, clean, renewable energy, and has installed solar panels on the roofs at its Mountain View facilities.Google to enter clean-energy business CNET News, November 2007Google's Next Frontier: Renewable Energy New York Times, November 2007 In 2010, Google also invested $39 million in wind power.

===Doodles===

Google was criticized by U.S conservatives in 2007 for not featuring Google Doodles for American patriotic holidays such as Memorial Day and Veterans Day. That year, Google featured a logo commemorating Veterans Day."Holiday and Events – Google style! – 2007", Google Logos, Google Inc., February 14, 2007

===Google Video===

On August 15, 2007 Google discontinued its Download-to-own/Download-to-rent (DTO/DTR) program."Is Google DRM crippling culture as great as it seems?", Ashlee Vance, The Register, January 8, 2006 Some videos previously purchased for ownership under that program were no longer viewable when the embedded Digital Rights Management (DRM) licenses were revoked. Google gave refunds for the full amount spent on videos using "gift certificates" (or "bonuses") to their customers' "Google Checkout Account"."Google Video robs customers of the videos they "own"", Cory Doctorow, boingboing, August 10, 2007"Google Pulls Plug, Everyone Misses Point", John C. Dvorak, PC Magazine (online)], August 14, 2007 After a public uproar, Google issued full refunds to the credit cards of the Google Video users without revoking the gift certificates.

===Search within search===

For some search results, Google provides a secondary search box that can be used to search within a website identified from the first search. Although this is an innovative search tool for users, it sparked controversy among some online publishers and retailers.  When performing a second search within a specific website, advertisements from competing and rival companies often showed up together with the results from the website being searched. This has the potential to draw users away from the website they were originally searching. In order to combat this controversy, Google has offered to turn off this feature for companies who request to have it removed. 
According to software engineer Ben Lee and Product Manager Jack Menzel, the idea for search within search originated from the way users were searching.  It appeared that users were often not finding exactly what they needed while trying to explore within a company site. "Teleporting" on the web, where users need only type part of the name of a website into Google (no need to remember the entire URL) in order to find the correct site, is what helps Google users complete their search. Google took this concept a step further and instead of just "teleporting", users could type in keywords to search within the website of their choice.

===Naming of Go programming language===

Google is criticized for naming their programming language "Go" while there is already an existing programming language called "Go!".

===Potential security threats===

Google has been criticised for providing information that could potentially be useful to terrorists. In the UK during March 2010, Liberal Democrats MP Paul Keetch and unnamed military officers criticised Google for including pictures of the outside of the headquarters of the SAS at RAF Base Hereford, stating that terrorists might use this information to plan attacks, rather than having to drive past it themselves. Google responded that there was no appreciable security risk and that it had no intention of removing the pictures.
On Google Maps, street view and 360 degree images of military bases were removed at the Pentagon's request.

===Tax avoidance===

Google has been criticized by journalists and others for using legal, but aggressive tax avoidance strategies to minimize its corporate tax bill. Google cut its taxes by $3.1 billion in the period of 2007 to 2009 using a technique that moves most of its foreign profits through Ireland and The Netherlands to Bermuda.  Google’s income shifting – involving strategies known to lawyers as the “Double Irish” and the “Dutch Sandwich” – helped reduce its overseas tax rate to 2.4 percent, the lowest of the top five U.S. technology companies by market capitalization, according to regulatory filings in six countries.

===Privacy and civil liberties organizations urged Google to suspend Gmail===

In 2004, thirty one privacy and civil liberties organizations wrote a letter calling upon Google to suspend its Gmail service until the privacy issues were adequately addressed. The letter also called upon Google to clarify its written information policies regarding data retention and data sharing among its business units.
The organizations voiced their concerns about Google’s plan to scan the text of all incoming messages for the purposes of ad placement, noting that the scanning of confidential email for inserting third party ad content violates the implicit trust of an email service provider. The scanning creates lower expectations of privacy in the email medium and may establish dangerous precedents.
Other concerns include the unlimited period for data retention that Google’s current policies allow, and the potential for unintended secondary uses of the information Gmail will collect and store.

==See also==

* Don't be evil
* Googlization
* History of Google

==References==

==External links==

* "Privacy Group Flunks Google", Lisa Vaas, eWeek.com, June 12, 2007
* "Who's afraid of Google?", The Economist,  August 30, 2007
* "10 reasons to turn Google Buzz off", Mushon Zer-Aviv, Mushon.com, February 17, 2010
* "Googlist Realism: The Google-China saga and the free-information regimes as a new site of cultural imperialism and moral tensions", Tricia Wang, Cultural Bytes, June 29, 2010
* "The Evil Side of Google", in 5 parts, Chelu.eu, December 12–17, 2010
* 
* Google Watch Watch, a website by Chris Beasley critical of Daniel Brandt's Google Watch website
* http://www.tahaali.com/2012/clear-your-google-web-history-before-new-policy-implemented/ Clear your Google Web History
* http://privacyrights.org/ar/Gmail.htm G-mail Sacrificing Privacy for Extra Storage

