
Globrix is a UK real estate search engine that was launched in January 2008. It was launched as a joint venture with News International, publishers of The Sunday Times, The Sun, The Times, The News of the World and Thelondonpaper.News International invests in property site, Globrix - NMA article 
Estate agents and letting agents can list their properties for free. This competes with traditional paid-listings sites such as Rightmove (originally a joint venture between four of the UK's largest property agents, now a public limited company), Propertyfinder (also partly backed by News International) and Primelocation (owned by Daily Mail and General Trust). Unlike most property websites, Globrix directs users to agent websites rather than hosting the property details and capturing the lead on Globrix itself. Globrix gathers its property listings in three different ways; crawling agent websites, taking datafeeds and by agents manually uploading via the Globrix extranet. Because Globrix is 'free to list', Globrix has been able to gain substantial market coverage and has claimed to list more properties than any other UK property website. Unlike websites like Gumtree and Oodle, private sellers and landlords are not allowed to list their properties on the site. 
The website charges property professionals and property related services companies for geo-targeted banner ads. There are also premium services available to estate and letting agents (such as Search Engine Optimization consultancy, branded email alerts and increased traffic) and Google Ads are displayed in unsold advertising positions on the right hand side of search results.

==Functionality==

The basic property search functionality is kept simple with just one text box on the homepage. Users can search for property by location (e.g. city, town, full postcode, partial postcode or, unusually for property portals, street name), places of interest (e.g. schools, stations, landmarks) or by key features (e.g. swimming pool, garden, double glazing, helipad). 
Search results can then be refined further by changing the price parameters, number of bedrooms and bathrooms, property type (e.g. detached, bungalow, flat), outside space, nearby stations and schools and property features (e.g. wooden floors, sea view). Registered users are able to search by additional parameters such as price change. 
As an alternative to the regular 'list view' of property results, users can also opt to see the search results plotted on Bing Maps (previously they used Google map) to allow users to look for property by location. (Some users are unimpressed with the lack of precision of the inferior Bing offering, which often manages to put the marker in a field, compared to the accuracy and ease of use of Googlemaps).  Users are able to drag and zoom the map, with relevant properties automatically placed in view. It is also possible for users to draw a catchment area directly onto the map of where they would like to search.

==Data==

Globrix data is sometimes used by the national media to illustrate stories on house prices,House prices drop £100,000 in two weeks in race to sell before Christmas - Daily Mail http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-1089563/House-prices-drop-100-000-WEEKS-race-sell-Christmas.html the economy, area trends, consumer confidenceHouse sales rise as prices fall - BBC News and the property market.Housing market stagnates as buyers disappear - Daily Telegraph

==Awards==

In 2008, Globrix was awarded 'Best Property Portal UK' which is awarded by one of the group's own newspapers, the The Daily Mail.Daily Mail Property Awards 2008 Globrix also won 'Estate Agency Service Firm of the Year' at The Negotiator Awards.The Negotiator Awards 2008

==Founders==

Globrix was founded by Dan Lee and Ian Parry, both ex employees of UK-based search company Autonomy and the Norwegian search company FAST.

== References ==

==External links==

* Globrix homepage
* News International invests in search engine - Financial Times
* Home search sites have a new kid on the block - The Independent

