
Google has had several logos since its renaming from BackRub. The current official Google logo was designed by Ruth Kedar, and is a wordmark based on the Catull typeface.
The company also includes various modifications and/or humorous features, such as cartoon modifications of their logo for use on holidays, birthdays of famous people, and major events, such as the Olympics.
These special logos, some designed by Dennis Hwang, have become known as Google Doodles. Google subsidiary YouTube has also featured some custom logos to highlight special events occurring on the site, these have been unofficially nicknamed "Yoodles".
In 1998, Sergey Brin created a computerized version of the Google letters using the free graphics program GIMP. The exclamation mark was added, mimicking the Yahoo! logo.
"There were a lot of different color iterations", says Ruth Kedar, the graphic designer who developed the now-famous logo. "We ended up with the primary colors, but instead of having the pattern go in order, we put a secondary color on the L, which brought back the idea that Google doesn't follow the rules."Zjawinski, Sonia. "How Google Got Its Colorful Logo." Wired (Online magazine). February 12, 2008. Retrieved on January 5, 2010.
In 2010, the Google logo received its first major and permanent overhaul since 1999. The new logo was first tested in November 2009, It utilises an identical typeface to the previous logo, but features a distinctly orange-colored "o" in place of the previous yellowish "o", as well as more subtle shadow rendered in a different shading style.

==Google Doodle==

The first Google Doodle was in honor of the Burning Man Festival of 1998.Doodle 4 Google The doodle was designed by Larry Page and Sergey Brin to notify users of their absence in case the servers crashed. Subsequent Google Doodles were designed by an outside contractor, until Larry and Sergey asked then-intern Dennis Hwang to design a logo for Bastille Day in 2000.  Hwang has been designing the Google Doodles ever since.Hwang, Dennis. "Oodles of Doodles." Google (corporate blog). June 8, 2004. Retrieved on July 19, 2006.
Clicking on a Google Doodle links to a string of Google search results about the topic, which can drive a lot of traffic to unsuspecting sites.Williams, David E. "Google's unknown artist has huge following." CNN. July 19, 2006. Retrieved on July 19, 2006.
Google doodles have been produced for the birthdays of several noted artists and scientists, including Andy Warhol, Albert Einstein, Leonardo da Vinci, Rabindranath Tagore, Louis Braille, Percival Lowell, Edvard Munch, Nikola Tesla, Béla Bartók, René Magritte, John Lennon, Michael Jackson, Robert Moog, Akira Kurosawa, H. G. Wells, Freddie Mercury, Samuel Morse, Hans Christian Ørsted, Mahatma Gandhi, Dennis Gabor, Constantin Brancusi, Antonio Vivaldi, Abdel Halim Hafez, and Jules Verne among others. Additionally, the featuring of Lowell's logo design coincided with the launch of another Google product, Google Maps.  Google doodles are also used to depict major events at Google, such as the company's own anniversary. The celebration of historical events is another common topic of Google Doodles including a Lego brick design in celebration of the interlocking Lego block's 50th anniversary. 
On February 14, 2007, Valentine's Day, the Google doodle featured a chocolate-dipped strawberry that combined the second "g" and the "l" as its green stem.Google logos Valentine's Day logo. February 14, 2007. Retrieved on April 6, 2007. This design gave the appearance that the "l" was missing, thereby displaying "Googe". In response to several speculations the Official Google Blog,Official Google Blog Strawberries are red, stems are green. responded: "When you look at the logo, you may worry that we forgot our name overnight, skipped a letter, or have decided that 'Googe' has a better ring to it. None of the above. I just know that those with true romance and poetry in their soul will see the subtlety immediately. And if you're feeling grouchy today, may I suggest eating a strawberry."
Google was criticized in 2007 for not featuring versions of the Google logo for American patriotic holidays such as Memorial Day and Veterans Day.
Google Doodles violate a long accepted tenet of brand management: that a logo must be respected and used correctly and consistently at all times. A constantly changing logo was thought to reduce brand equity. While this may be true of many brands, Google has successfully defied the orthodoxy; the Google logo has constant charming, interactive engagement that gets much press and buzz.

== Interactive and video doodles ==

On May 21, 2010, the 30th anniversary of the arcade game Pac-Man, Google unveiled worldwide their first interactive logo, created in association with Namco. a permanent Google Pac-Man site, due to the popular user demand for the playable logo.
On September 4, 2010, Google replaced the logo with an interactive Buckminsterfullerene or "buckyball" doodle to commemorate the 25th anniversary of its discovery.
On September 6, 2010, Google added another interactive logo, which consisted of numerous coloured balls that fly near a cursor.http://www.google.com/logos/particle.html
On February 8, 2011, Google ran one of its most interactive Doodles in honor of Sci-Fi writer Jules Verne's 183rd birthday.Google Doodle journeys to the center of Jules Verne "Network World" "Pulling" on a lever enabled viewers to get a Nautilus submarine's view undersea of everything from divers to treasure to sea creatures, including a coral formation in the shape of the logo.Google doodle honors Jules Verne
On October 8, 2010, Google ran its first animated doodle, a short music video of "Imagine" to commemorate John Lennon's 70th birthday.http://www.google.com/doodles/john-lennons-70th-birthday Similarly, Freddie Mercury's 65th birthday was celebrated on September 5, 2011 with an animated clip set to "Don't Stop Me Now".http://www.google.com/doodles/freddie-mercurys-65th-birthday
On April 15, 2011, Google sported the first video doodle, commemorating Charlie Chaplin's 122nd birthday.Lights, camera, doodle! This doodle was a black and white YouTube video that, when clicked upon, started playing before redirecting to the usual Google search featuring the doodle's special occasion. All parts in this short film were played by the Google doodle team, and special behind-the-scenes footage was to be found on the Google blog.
Google displayed an interactive electric guitar doodle starting June 9, 2011 to celebrate the 96th birthday of Les Paul.
Apart from being able to hover the cursor over the doodle to strum the strings just like one of Les Paul's Gibson guitars, there was also a keyboard button, which when enabled allowed interaction with the doodle via the keyboard. The doodle still maintained some resemblance to the Google logo. In the U.S, the doodle also allowed the user to record a 30 second clip, after which a URL is created and able to be sent to others. The doodle remained on the site an extra day due to popularity in the US. It now has its own page linked to the Google Doodles archives 
On June 15, 2011, Google displayed images updated almost in real time of an ongoing total lunar eclipse, along with a scroll bar allowing visitors to view images from the entire duration of the event.Ned Potter, Lunar Eclipse 2011: Live on Google Doodle, YouTube and Here on ABC News.com, ABC News, June 15, 2011. Images were captured from cameras in places where the eclipse was visible including South Africa, Dubai and the Canary Islands.
On November 23, 2011, Google celebrated the 60th anniversary of Stanislaw Lem's first book, The Astronauts, by creating an interactive logo using concepts and illustrations from The Cyberiad.http://www.google.com/doodles/60th-anniversary-of-stanislaw-lems-first-publication August 6th and October 12th of the same year also included interactive doodles - the former date, Lucille Ball's 100th birthday, made the Google logo a television set playing clips of I Love Lucy.http://www.google.com/doodles/lucille-balls-100th-birthday The latter date, Art Clokey's 90th birthday, made the Google logo into interactive versions of Gumby characters.http://www.google.com/doodles/art-clokeys-90th-birthday
On May 23, 2012, Google's logo changed into a playable synthesizer in honor of Robert Moog's 78th birthday.http://digitalanalog.in/2012/05/23/google-doodles-tribute-to-bob-moog/ On June 23nd, in commemoration of Alan Turing's 100th birthday, Google's logo became an interactive Turing Machine. http://www.wired.com/geekmom/2012/06/a-google-doodle-for-alan-turings-100th-birthday/

==Doodle4Google competitions==

Google holds a Doodle4Google

==Colorless logo==

From time to time, Google shows a special colorless logo  on a local homepage in recognition of a major tragedy, often for several days. The design was apparently first used on the Google Poland homepage following the air disaster that killed President Lech Kaczyński in April 2010. A few days later, the logo was used in China and Hong Kong to pay respects to the victims of the Qinghai earthquake.Google Shows Colorless Logo To Chinese Users Over Qinghai Earthquake, Search Engine Land, Apr 20, 2010
On September 8, 2010, the doodle once again changed to a greyed-out Google logo that lit up with the standard Google colors as the first 6 letters of a search query were entered. It goes by the name of the Keystroke Logo.http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5og1MYMuhM4

==Favicon==

Google's favicon is a version of the lowercase "g" from its official logo, introduced in 2008 - 2009, and originally intended to be a part of a larger set of icons developed for better scalability on mobile devices. In June 2008, Google launched a contest intended to receive favicon submissions, and a design made by André Resende, a computer science undergraduate student at the University of Campinas in Brazil, formed the basis of the new design. From Official Google Blog: "His placement of a white 'g' on a color-blocked background was highly recognizable and attractive, while seeming to capture the essence of Google".

==References==

==External links==

* Official Google logos
* Dennis Hwang: The man behind Google Doodles
* Google: Pac-Man
* Google Happy Birthday 13 Year
* Today's Google Doodle
* How to Solve Turing's Machine Google Doodle

