
Googlization is a neologism that describes the expansion of Google's search technologies and aesthetics into more and more markets, web applications, and contexts, including traditional institutions such as the library 

==History of term==

In 2003, John Battelle and Alex Salkever first introduced the term ‘googlization’ to mean the dominance of Google over nearly all forms of informational commerce on the web. Initially specializing in text-based Internet searching, Google has expanded its services to include image searching, web-based email, online mapping, video sharing, news delivery, instant messaging, mobile phones, and services aimed at the academic community. Google has entered partnerships with established media interests such as Time Warner AOL, News Corporation, the New York Times, and various new agencies such as Associated Press, Agence France-Presse, and the UK Press Association. Google has therefore become a giant with complex entanglements with traditional and new media.

==Definition==

The term Googlization is not universally accepted as a definition for this phenomenon. It is defined not only as a corporate entity, but also in the more general sense, as both a noun and a verb.
Many information professionals would define the term as ‘digitizing a library or making something into a Google product.’.

==Development==

Since 2000, media scholars have analyzed and are aware of the impact of Googlization to modern human society.
The Googlization of Everything, a book published in March 2011 by Siva Vaidhyanathan, provides a critical interpretation of how Google is disrupting culture, commerce, and community. In Vaidhyanathan’s own words “the book will answer three key questions: What does the world look like through the lens of Google?; How is Google's ubiquity affecting the production and dissemination of knowledge?; and how has the corporation altered the rules and practices that govern other companies, institutions, and states?” The author, Siva Vaidhyanathan, also has a blog where he documented the development of the book and any developments or news about Googlization and Google in general. Both the book and the blog are subtitled “How One Company is Disrupting Culture, Commerce, and Community… and Why we Should Worry.” The sentiments expressed by both the book and the blog seem to be typical of many cultural commentators.

==Criticisms of googlization==

The founders of Google have encountered hostility to their enterprise almost since its inception, both in the form of general press criticism and actual legal action. Various lawsuits have included infringement of copyright law; its dealings with advertising companies and in the volume of advertising that its users encounter.
Also, despite Google’s general market dominance, some of its offshoots and additional projects have been less than successful. Nexus One (direct-to-customer sales) and Google Buzz (social networking site) all encountered problems when they were first established, problems which they are still struggling with. Also, in early February 2010, Google deleted years worth of archives from six popular music blogs due to receiving several DMCA notices from music copyright holders alleging that music was being shared illegally. This has proved to be controversial for Google.
In terms of Googlization there is a deep mistrust among some members

==Defense of googlization==

Google has stated that its mission is "to organize the world’s information and make it universally accessible and useful". However, Google has become aware of the level of criticism it has been receiving, and has commented that "believe it is popular because it offers useful products and services for millions of people. Google's motto is "Don't be evil" and its vision is to make all knowledge freely available to everyone on the planet."
Others
In late March 2010, Google discontinued its local domain for China while continuing to offer their uncensored Hong Kong-based domain. Google had initially offered a censored version of their search engine in China. They reversed this decision when they decided that it was in conflict with their mission and their ideals. Speaking for Google, one of its founders, Sergey Brin, said "One of the reasons I am glad we are making this move in China is that the China situation was really emboldening other countries to try and implement their own firewalls.".

==See also==

* New media
* Criticism of Google
* Don't be evil
* McDonaldization
* Cocacolonization

==References==

==External links==

*The Googlization of Information: Google’s Influential Reach Over Information
*De-Googlization: A Librarian’s Challenge with Information Monopoly
*The Googlization of Everything and the Dystopian Vision of Copyright

