
Monmouthpedia (stylised as   
The project uses QRpedia QR codes to provide multilingual smart phone access to Wikipedia articles covering notable subjects in Monmouth, such as places, people, artefacts, flora and fauna.

== Inception ==

The idea of Monmouthpedia was conceived in late 2011 by John Cummings, a resident of Monmouth. Cummings attended a TEDx event in Bristol which discussed the QRpedia project in use at Derby Museum and Art Gallery. Cummings founded the project with chair of Wikimedia UK, Roger Bamkin, who co-founded QRpedia.  The project was subsequently supported by Monmouthshire County Council, and the council-owned Shire Hall later announced plans to instate a Wikipedian-in-Residence and introduce sessions to help visitors with contributions to the project.
Monmouthpedia's initial goal was to have 1,000 Wikipedia articles linked by April 2012, with each article having a corresponding ceramic plaque emblazoned with a QR code.
Monmouth Library has become the first library in the world to add QR codes to books. Users with smart phones can now instantly find Wikipedia articles on the book and its author. Priority has been given to local literature and Welsh titles but recent acquisitions on the Queen's Jubilee and the Olympics have also been QR coded."Monmouth Library First in the World", Monmouthshire Libraries, 21 May 2012. Retrieved 23 May 2012.

== Reception ==

Glyn Moody, writing for Techdirt, questioned whether Monmouthpedia was the future of Wikipedia.   He described the project as creating "a kind of fractal Wikipedia" likening it to the 2010 film Inception, potentially enabling "a Wikipedia within a Wikipedia within a Wikipedia." Within days of the launch, the initiative had led to widespread interest. Stevie Benton from Wikimedia UK reported that the project page had been viewed 10,000 times. Benton also reported there had been inquiries from towns in Norway, Britain, France, Scotland and Texas, USA. One test of success will however be the project's ability to attract more tourists to the town.Erika Morphy, "Tiny Welsh Burg Paints the Town Wiki", TechNewsWorld, 21 May 2012. Retrieved 22 May 2012.
Jimmy Wales, the founder of Wikipedia, was enthusiastic about the initiative. "I’m really excited by the Monmouthpedia project," he said. "Bringing a whole town to life on Wikipedia is something new and is a testament to the forward-thinking people of Monmouth, all of the volunteers and the Wikimedia UK team. I’m looking forward to seeing other towns and cities doing the same thing."Timon Singh, "Monmouth: The World’s First Wikipedia Town Launches In Wales", Inhabitat, 22 May 2012. Retrieved 23 May 2012.
File:Shire Hall QRpedia plaque 3.jpg|One of the Monmouthpedia plaques
File:World's first Wikipedia town 5.JPG|World's first Wikipedia town
File:Monmouthpedia at Library.jpg|QR codes in libary books
File:MonmouthpediA QRpedia map.jpg|Trialling the QR codes

== References ==

== External links ==

*
*Monmouth, A Town Full of QR Codes Leading to Wikipedia

