
Opera is a web browser and Internet suite developed by Opera Software with over 270 million users worldwide.Record Revenue Growth in 2012 The browser handles common Internet-related tasks such as displaying web sites, sending and receiving e-mail messages, managing contacts, chatting on IRC, downloading files via BitTorrent, and reading web feeds. Opera is offered free of charge for personal computers and mobile phones.
Opera is the most popular desktop browser in some countries, such as Ukraine.StatCounter Opera Mini, which is the most popularStatCounter mobile web browser as of May 2011, has been chosen as the default integrated web browser in several mobile handsets by their respective manufacturers.
Features include tabbed browsing, page zooming, mouse gestures, and an integrated download manager. Its security features include built-in phishing and malware protection, SSL/TLS encryption when browsing HTTPS websites, and the ability to delete private data such as HTTP cookies. Opera has been noted for originating many features later adopted by other web browsers.
Opera runs on a variety of personal computer operating systems, including Microsoft Windows, 

==History==

Opera began in 1994 as a research project at Telenor, the largest Norwegian telecommunications company. In 1995, it branched out into a separate company named Opera Software ASA.
Up to this point, Opera was trialware and had to be purchased after the trial period ended. Version 5.0 (released in 2000) saw the end of this requirement. Instead, Opera became ad-sponsored, displaying advertisements to users who had not paid for it.
Among the new features introduced in version 9.1 (released in 2006) was fraud protection using technology from GeoTrust, a digital certificate provider, and PhishTank, an organization that tracks known phishing web sites.
This feature was further improved and expanded in version 9.5, when GeoTrust was replaced with Netcraft, and malware protection from Haute Secure was added.
Also in 2006, editions of Opera were made and released for Nintendo's DS and Wii gaming systems.
The Nintendo DS Browser is not free; it is sold as a physical DS game cartridge. The DSi has an Internet Channel that can be downloaded for free from the DSi shop.
A new JavaScript engine called Carakan, after the Javanese script, was introduced with version 10.50.
The initial release of Opera 10.50 was for Windows only, in order to allow the development team to focus on a timed release with the EU browser ballot offered to European Economic Area users of Microsoft Windows.
On December 16, 2010, Opera 11 was released, featuring extensions, tab stacking, visual mouse gestures, and changes to the address field.

==Features==

As of version 10.5, Opera features a new JavaScript engine, as well as a new vector graphics library, which together significantly increase Opera's overall rendering speed.
Opera includes built-in tabbed browsing, ad blocking, fraud protection, a download manager and BitTorrent client, a search bar, and a web feed aggregator. Opera also comes with an e-mail client called Opera Mail and an IRC chat client built in.
Opera includes a "Speed Dial" feature, which allows the user to add up to 25 links (or more, by editing the speeddial.ini file) shown in thumbnail form in a page displayed when a new tab is opened. Thumbnails of the linked pages are automatically generated and used for visual recognition on the Speed Dial page or can be modified using Opera Image Dial Generator. Once set up, this feature allows the user to more easily navigate to the selected web pages.
Opera supports Opera Widgets, small web applications that start from within Opera. Alongside Widgets, "User JavaScript" may be used to add custom JavaScript to web pages. Greasemonkey support is limited, and there is no interface to manage scripts or toggle 'Greasemonkey-on' functionality.
Opera is extensible in a third way via plug-ins, relatively small programs that add specific functions to the browser, and as of Opera 11, third-party extensions. However, Opera limits what plug-ins can do.

===Languages and localization===

Opera is currently available in 56 languages and locales: Afrikaans, Azerbaijani, Belarusian, Bengali, Bulgarian, Czech, Chinese (Simplified and Traditional), Croatian, Danish, Dutch, English (UK and US), Estonian, Finnish, French (France and Canadian), West Frisian, Georgian, German, Greek, Hindi, Hungarian, Indonesian, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Lithuanian, Macedonian, Malay, Montenegrin, Norwegian (Nynorsk and Bokmål), Polish, Portuguese (Portugal and Brazil), Punjabi, Romanian, Russian, Scottish Gaelic, Serbian, Slovak, Spanish (Latin America and Spain), Swahili, Swedish, Tagalog, Tamil, Thai, Telugu, Turkish, Ukrainian, Uzbek, Vietnamese and Zulu.

===Usability and accessibility===

Opera was designed with a commitment to computer accessibility for users who have visual or motor impairments. As a multimodal browser, it also caters to a wide variety of personal preferences in the user interface.
It is possible to control nearly every aspect of the browser using only the keyboard,
Page zooming allows text, images and other content such as Adobe Flash Player, Java platform and Scalable Vector Graphics to be increased or decreased in size (20% to 1,000%) to help those with impaired vision. The user may also specify the fonts and colors for web pages, and even override the page's CSS styling as well. This can be useful for making sites appear in high contrast or in more readable fonts.
Voice control, co-developed with IBM, allows control of the browser without the use of a keyboard or mouse. It can also read aloud pages and marked text.
Opera Turbo is a feature intended for slower internet connections; when enabled, Opera's servers act as a proxy which compresses the requested web page by up to 80% before sending it to the user. This process reduces the total size of the data being sent, and thus shortens the amount of time necessary for the page to load. This technique is also used in Opera Mini.

===Privacy and security===

Opera has several security features visible to the end user. One is the option to delete private data, such as HTTP cookies, the browsing history, and the cache, with the click of a button. This lets users erase personal data after browsing from a shared computer.
When visiting a secure web site, Opera encrypts data using either SSL 3 or TLS,
The user can protect every saved password stored in Opera with a master password. This prevents malware from accessing those passwords unless the master password is known.
Also, Opera does not show saved passwords using password manager unlike Firefox and Chrome.
To catch security flaws and other software bugs before they are exploited or become a serious problem, the Opera Software company maintains a public web form where users can submit bug reports.
In January 2007, Asa Dotzler of the competing Mozilla Corporation accused the Opera Software company of downplaying information about security vulnerabilities in Opera that were fixed in December 2006. Dotzler claimed that users were not clearly informed of security vulnerabilities present in the previous version of Opera, and thus they would not realize that they needed to upgrade to the latest version or risk being exploited.
Opera responded to these accusations the next day.

===Standards support===

Opera was one of the first browsers to support Cascading Style Sheets (CSS), now a major building block of web design. which is primarily focused on DOM and JavaScript standards compliance.
On Ecma International's ECMAScript standards conformance Test 262 the one failed test being invalid.
On the official CSS 2.1 test suite by standardization organization W3C, Opera's rendering engine Presto passes 89.37% (77.44% out of 86.65%) of covered CSS 2.1 tests.

===Opera Unite===

Opera Unite is an extensible framework that allows for several web services (referred to as "Applications") to be hosted from the user's computer, including a web server for hosting a site, file and photo sharing, a chat room, and streaming media. Opera Software has released an API to create new or improved applications for the Opera Unite Platform, and many have already done so. An Opera Unite user's applications run on a domain associated with their My Opera Community account, and are accessible from any web browser. For these applications to be accessed, the computer and the Opera Browser hosting the applications must both be running.
The included API uses HTML, CSS, client-side ECMAScript and a new server-side JavaScript technology with local file access and persistent storage. Unite Applications are packaged according to the W3C Widgets 1.0 specification. Opera also provides a vetted facility for developers to upload these user-created applications.
Unite has been included standard since version 10.10.
Unite, like Widgets, is being phased out and has been discontinued as of version 12.00.

==Other versions==

In addition to the versions of Opera for personal computers, there are versions for a variety of devices, all based on the same core, with some variation in the features offered and the user interface.

===Portable version===

In Opera 11, the installer gives you the option to install the browser as a "Standalone Installation (USB)."  There are also 3rd-party portable versions of the browser available for Microsoft Windows.

===Smartphones and PDAs===

Opera Mobile is an edition of Opera designed for smartphones and personal digital assistants (PDAs). The first version of Opera Mobile was released in 2000 for the Psion Series 7 and NetBook, with a port to the Windows Mobile platform coming in 2004. Today, Opera Mobile is available for a variety of devices that run Android, the Windows Mobile, S60 platform, or UIQ operating systems.
Users may also try Opera Mobile free. Devices that use the UIQ 3 operating system, such as the Sony Ericsson P990 and Motorola RIZR Z8, come pre-installed with Opera Mobile, the former price of Opera Mobile being included in the price of the phone.
One of Opera Mobile's major features is the ability to dynamically reformat web pages to better fit the handheld's display using small screen rendering technology.

===Mobile phones===

Opera Mini, offered free of charge, is designed primarily for mobile phones, but also for smartphones and personal digital assistants. Versions up to 4 used the Java ME platform, requiring the mobile device to be capable of running Java ME applications. The browser began as a pilot project in 2005.
Opera Mini requests web pages through the Opera Software company's servers, which process and compress them before relaying the pages back to the mobile phone.
In March 2010, Opera Software launched a new beta version of Opera Mini for mobile phones running on Google's open source Android platform.
From version 5, there is a native version of Opera Mini 5 for Windows Mobile 2003, 5- and 6-based handsets which does not require Java; it implements the same features as the Java version.
On April 13, 2010, Opera Mini was officially approved as a free download for iPhone (and iPod Touch) on Apple's App Store.

===Tablets===

An iPad specific version of Opera was demonstrated at Mobile World Congress 2011, No dates have yet been announced.

===Nintendo DS===

The Nintendo DS Browser is an edition of Opera for the Nintendo DS handheld gaming system. The Nintendo DS Browser was released in Japan on 24 July 2006, It is sold as a physical game cartridge for US$30.
The Nintendo DS Browser includes the same small screen rendering and page zooming technology present in Opera Mobile. It also includes handwriting recognition software and an on-screen keyboard to enable user input. Additionally, Nintendo partnered with Astaro Internet Security to provide web filtering for the Nintendo DS Browser. The technology is simply a professionally maintained proxy server that blocks web sites related to pornography, discrimination, security hacking, software piracy, violence, gambling, illegal drugs, alcohol, tobacco, dating, weapons, abortion, and other content that Nintendo deems objectionable.
In August 2007, the Nintendo DS Browser was quietly discontinued in North America, although it is still available from Nintendo's online store.

===Wii===

On 10 May 2006, the Opera Software company announced that it was partnering with Nintendo to provide a web browser for Nintendo's Wii gaming console. Opera for the Wii, called the Internet Channel, was free to download from its release on 12 April 2007 until 30 June 2007. After that date, Wii users had to pay 500 Wii Points to download it. However, in late August / early September of the year 2009, the Internet Channel was once again available to download for free and those who paid for the service had their Wii Points returned in the form of a free NES virtual console game.
Scott Hedrick, an executive of the Opera Software company, explained that the Wii browser was designed to suit a "living room environment".

==Market adoption==


The browser has been more successful in Eastern Europe, including about 47% market share in 2009 in Georgia, 43% in Ukraine, 39% in Kazakhstan, 36% in Russia, and 8–11% in Poland, Latvia, Lithuania, and the Czech Republic. Georgia Ukraine, Russia, Poland, Latvia, Lithuania, Czech Republic
In July 2011, Opera broke its previous download records when Opera 11.50 was released and was recorded to be downloaded 35 million times during the first week of release.
Since its first release in 1996, the browser has had limited success on personal computers. It has had more success in the area of mobile browsing, with product releases for a variety of platforms.
It is used on some television set-top boxes as well.

==Reception==

Critical reception of Opera has been largely positive,
Notwithstanding other criticism, when Nintendo chose in 2006 to adopt Opera as the web browser for its Wii and Nintendo DS gaming systems, a Nintendo representative explained:

===Awards===

Over the years, Opera for personal computers has received several awards. These awards include:
* About.com Best Major Desktop Browser - 2010
* Webware 100 winner, 2009
* Webware 100 winner, 2008
* PC World World Class Award, 2004 and 2005
* Web Host Magazine & Buyer's Guide Editors' Choice
* PC Magazine Testsieger (Test Winner), 2006
* PC Plus Performance Award
* PC World Best Data Product, 2003
* PC World Best i Test, 2003
* Web Attack Editor's Pick, 2003
* ZDNet Editor's Pick, 2000
* Tech Cruiser Award 4 Excellence, 1999

==See also==

* Comparison of browser synchronizers
* Comparison of Usenet newsreaders
* List of pop-up blocking software
* Web browser history

==References==

==External links==

* 
* 
* 
* 

