
Probability is ordinarily used to describe an attitude of mind towards some proposition of whose truth is 
not certain. Stuart, A.; Ord, Keith  (1994) Kendall's Advanced Theory of Statistics, Volume 1: Distribution Theory, 6th Ed., ISBN 978-0-470-66530-5    The higher the probability of an event, the more certain we are that the event will occur.  Thus, probability in an applied sense is a measure of the confidence a person has that a (random) event will occur. 
The concept has been given an axiomatic mathematical derivation in probability theory, which is used widely in such areas of study as mathematics, statistics, finance, gambling, science, artificial intelligence/machine learning and philosophy to, for example, draw inferences about the expected frequency of events.  Probability theory is also used to describe the underlying mechanics and regularities of complex systems.

==Interpretations==

When dealing with experiments that are random and well-defined in a purely theoretical setting (like tossing a fair coin), probabilities describe the statistical number of outcomes considered divided by the number of all outcomes (tossing a fair coin twice will yield HH with probability 1/4, because the four outcomes HH, HT, TH and TT are possible). When it comes to practical application, however, the word probability does not have a singular direct definition.  In fact, there are two major categories of probability interpretations, whose adherents possess conflicting views about the fundamental nature of probability:
#Objectivists assign numbers to describe some objective or physical state of affairs. The most popular version of objective probability is frequentist probability, which claims that the probability of a random event denotes the relative frequency of occurrence of an experiment's outcome, when repeating the experiment. This interpretation considers probability to be the relative frequency "in the long run" of outcomes. A modification of this is propensity probability, which interprets probability as the tendency of some experiment to yield a certain outcome, even if it is performed only once.
#Subjectivists assign numbers per subjective probability, i.e., as a degree of belief. claim that all agents will eventually have sufficiently similar assessments of probabilities, given enough evidence,.

==Etymology==

The word Probability derives from the Latin probabilitas, which can also mean probity, a measure of the authority of a witness in a legal case in Europe, and often correlated with the witness's nobility. In a sense, this differs much from the modern meaning of probability, which, in contrast, is a measure of the weight of empirical evidence, and is arrived at from inductive reasoning and statistical inference.Hacking, I. (2006) The Emergence of Probability: A Philosophical Study of Early Ideas about Probability, Induction and Statistical Inference, Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0-521-68557-3 

==History==

The scientific study of probability is a modern development. Gambling shows that there has been an interest in quantifying the ideas of probability for millennia, but exact mathematical descriptions arose much later. There are reasons of course, for the slow development of the mathematics of probability. Whereas games of chance provided the impetus for the mathematical study of probability, fundamental issues are still obscured by the superstitions of gamblers.Freund, John. (1973)  Introduction to Probability. Dickenson ISBN 978-0822100782 (p. 1)
According to Richard Jeffrey, "Before the middle of the seventeenth century, the term 'probable' (Latin probabilis) meant approvable, and was applied in that sense, univocally, to opinion and to action. A probable action or opinion was one such as sensible people would undertake or hold, in the circumstances."Jeffrey, R.C., Probability and the Art of Judgment, Cambridge University Press. (1992). pp. 54-55 . ISBN 0-521-39459-7 However, in legal contexts especially, 'probable' could also apply to propositions for which there was good evidence.Franklin, J. (2001) The Science of Conjecture: Evidence and Probability Before Pascal, Johns Hopkins University Press. (pp. 22, 113, 127)
Aside from elementary work by Girolamo Cardano in the 16th century, the doctrine of probabilities dates to the correspondence of Pierre de Fermat and Blaise Pascal (1654). Christiaan Huygens (1657) gave the earliest known scientific treatment of the subject. for histories of the early development of the very concept of mathematical probability.
The theory of errors may be traced back to Roger Cotes's Opera Miscellanea (posthumous, 1722), but a memoir prepared by Thomas Simpson in 1755 (printed 1756) first applied the theory to the discussion of errors of observation. The reprint (1757) of this memoir lays down the axioms that positive and negative errors are equally probable, and that certain assignable limits define the range of all errors. Simpson also discusses continuous errors and describes a probability curve.
The first two laws of error that were proposed both originated with Pierre-Simon Laplace. The first law was published in 1774 and stated that the frequency of an error could be expressed as an exponential function of the numerical magnitude of the error, disregarding sign. The second law of error was proposed in 1778 by Laplace and stated that the frequency of the error is an exponential function of the square of the error.Wilson EB (1923) "First and second laws of error". Journal of the American Statistical Association, 18, 143 The second law of error is called the normal distribution or the Gauss law. "It is difficult historically to attribute that law to Gauss, who in spite of his well-known precocity had probably not made this discovery before he was two years old."
Daniel Bernoulli (1778) introduced the principle of the maximum product of the probabilities of a system of concurrent errors.
Adrien-Marie Legendre (1805) developed the method of least squares, and introduced it in his Nouvelles méthodes pour la détermination des orbites des comètes (New Methods for Determining the Orbits of Comets). In ignorance of Legendre's contribution, an Irish-American writer, Robert Adrain, editor of "The Analyst" (1808), first deduced the law of facility of error,
In the nineteenth century authors on the general theory included Laplace, Sylvestre Lacroix (1816), Littrow (1833), Adolphe Quetelet (1853), Richard Dedekind (1860), Helmert (1872), Hermann Laurent (1873), Liagre, Didion, and Karl Pearson. Augustus De Morgan and George Boole improved the exposition of the theory.
Andrey Markov introduced
On the geometric side (see integral geometry) contributors to The Educational Times were influential (Miller, Crofton, McColl, Wolstenholme, Watson, and Artemas Martin).

==Theory==

Like other theories, the theory of probability is a representation of probabilistic concepts in formal terms—that is, in terms that can be considered separately from their meaning. These formal terms are manipulated by the rules of mathematics and logic, and any results are interpreted or translated back into the problem domain.
There have been at least two successful attempts to formalize probability, namely the Kolmogorov formulation and the Cox formulation. In Kolmogorov's formulation (see probability space), sets are interpreted as events and probability itself as a measure on a class of sets. In Cox's theorem, probability is taken as a primitive (that is, not further analyzed) and the emphasis is on constructing a consistent assignment of probability values to propositions. In both cases, the laws of probability are the same, except for technical details.
There are other methods for quantifying uncertainty,
such as the Dempster-Shafer theory or possibility theory,
but those are essentially different and not compatible with the laws of probability as usually understood.

== Applications ==

Probability theory is applied in everyday life in risk assessment and in trade on financial markets. Governments apply probabilistic methods in environmental regulation, where it is called pathway analysis.
A good example is the effect of the perceived probability of any widespread Middle East conflict on oil prices—which have ripple effects in the economy as a whole. An assessment by a commodity trader that a war is more likely vs. less likely sends prices up or down, and signals other traders of that opinion. Accordingly, the probabilities are neither assessed independently nor necessarily very rationally. The theory of behavioral finance emerged to describe the effect of such groupthink on pricing, on policy, and on peace and conflict.Singh, Laurie (2010) "Whither Efficient Markets? Efficient Market Theory and Behavioral Finance". The Finance Professionals' Post, 2010.
The discovery of rigorous methods to assess and combine probability assessments has changed society. It is important for most citizens to understand how probability assessments are made, and how they contribute to decisions.
Another significant application of probability theory in everyday life is reliability. Many consumer products, such as automobiles and consumer electronics, use reliability theory in product design to reduce the probability of failure. Failure probability may influence a manufacture's decisions on a product's warranty.Gorman, Michael (2011) "Management Insights". Management Science 
The cache language model and other statistical language models that are used in natural language processing are also examples of applications of probability theory.

==Mathematical treatment==

Consider an experiment that can produce a number of results. The collection of all results is called the sample space of the experiment. The power set of the sample space is formed by considering all different collections of possible results. For example, rolling a die can produce six possible results. One collection of possible results give an odd number on the die. Thus, the subset {1,3,5} is an element of the power set of the sample space of die rolls. These collections are called "events." In this case, {1,3,5} is the event that the die falls on some odd number. If the results that actually occur fall in a given event, the event is said to have occurred.
A probability is a way of assigning every event a value between zero and one, with the requirement that the event made up of all possible results (in our example, the event {1,2,3,4,5,6}) is assigned a value of one. To qualify as a probability, the assignment of values must satisfy the requirement that if you look at a collection of mutually exclusive events (events with no common results, e.g., the events {1,6}, {3}, and {2,4} are all mutually exclusive), the probability that at least one of the events will occur is given by the sum of the probabilities of all the individual events.Ross, Sheldon. A First course in Probability, 8th Edition. Page 26-27.
The probability of an event A is written as P(A), p(A) or Pr(A).Olofsson (2005) Page 8. This mathematical definition of probability can extend to infinite sample spaces, and even uncountable sample spaces, using the concept of a measure.

===Independent probability===

If two events, A and B are independent then the joint probability is

====Mutually exclusive====

If two events are mutually exclusive then the probability of either occurring is

====Not mutually exclusive====

If the events are not mutually exclusive then

===Conditional probability===

Conditional probability is the probability of some event A, given the occurrence of some other event B.

===Summary of probabilities===

== Relation to randomness ==

In a deterministic universe, based on Newtonian concepts, there would be no probability if all conditions are known, (Laplace's demon).  In the case of a roulette wheel, if the force of the hand and the period of that force are known, the number on which the ball will stop would be a certainty.  Of course, this also assumes knowledge of inertia and friction of the wheel, weight, smoothness and roundness of the ball, variations in hand speed during the turning and so forth. A probabilistic description can thus be more useful than Newtonian mechanics for analyzing the pattern of outcomes of repeated rolls of roulette wheel. Physicists face the same situation in kinetic theory of gases, where the system, while deterministic in principle, is so complex (with the number of molecules typically the order of magnitude of Avogadro constant 6.02·1023) that only statistical description of its properties is feasible.
Probability theory is required to describe quantum phenomena.Burgi, Mark (2010) "Interpretations of Negative Probabilities", p. 1.  In modern interpretations, quantum decoherence accounts for subjectively probabilistic behavior.

== See also ==

* Chance (disambiguation)
* Class membership probabilities
* Equiprobable

== Notes ==

==References==

* Kallenberg, O. (2005) Probabilistic Symmetries and Invariance Principles. Springer -Verlag, New York. 510 pp. ISBN 0-387-25115-4
* Kallenberg, O. (2002) Foundations of Modern Probability, 2nd ed. Springer Series in Statistics. 650 pp. ISBN 0-387-95313-2
*Olofsson, Peter (2005) Probability, Statistics, and Stochastic Processes, Wiley-Interscience. 504 pp ISBN 0-471-67969-0.

==External links==

* Virtual Laboratories in Probability and Statistics (Univ. of Ala.-Huntsville)
* 
*Probability and Statistics EBook
*Edwin Thompson Jaynes. Probability Theory: The Logic of Science. Preprint: Washington University, (1996). — HTML index with links to PostScript files and PDF (first three chapters)
*People from the History of Probability and Statistics (Univ. of Southampton)
*Probability and Statistics on the Earliest Uses Pages (Univ. of Southampton)
*Earliest Uses of Symbols in Probability and Statistics on Earliest Uses of Various Mathematical Symbols
*Probability Homework Help, Definitions, Distribution Calculators and Study Guides
*A tutorial on probability and Bayes’ theorem devised for first-year Oxford University students
*pdf file of An Anthology of Chance Operations (1963) at UbuWeb
*Probability Theory Guide for Non-Mathematicians
*Understanding Risk and Probability with BBC raw
* Introduction to Probability - eBook, by Charles Grinstead, Laurie Snell Source (GNU Free Documentation License)

