
Scroogle was a web service that allowed users to perform Google searches anonymously. It focused heavily on searcher privacy by blocking Google cookies and not saving log files. The service was launched in 2003 by Daniel Brandt. After 2005, the service encountered rapid growth before running into a series of problems starting in 2010. In February 2012, the service was permanently shut down by its creator due to a combination of throttling of search requests by Google and a denial-of-service attack by an unknown person or group. Before its demise, Scroogle handled around 350,000 queries daily and ranked among the top 4,000 sites worldwide in traffic.

==Background==

Scroogle offered a web interface and browser plugins for Firefox, Google Chrome, and Internet Explorer that allowed users to run Google searches anonymously.  The service scraped Google search results, removing ads and sponsored links.  Only the raw search results were returned, meaning features such as page preview were not available.  For added security, Scroogle gave users the option of having all communication between their computer and the search page be SSL encrypted.[ref]
[/ref]  Although Scroogle's activities technically violated Google's terms of service, Google generally tolerated its existence, whitelisting the site on multiple occasions.
Scroogle promised to delete all search terms within an hour and block Google's cookie files.  All logs were deleted weekly, compared to the two years Google saves log files for.   "Even if the feds come around and ask me questions I don't know the answer because I don't have the logs any more," claimed company president Daniel Brandt. 
The service's name was a reference to both scraping and Ebenezer Scrooge.  Scroogle was supported solely by user donations—an average of $43/day—and run by not-for-profit Public Information Research.  At the time of its demise, Scroogle was running off a total of 6 servers.

==History==

Scroogle was created in 2003 by Google critic Daniel Brandt, who was concerned about Google collecting personal information on its users.  In response, the service was moved to a new server and the source code published so that any who so desired could run Scroogle Scraper on their own computer.  Brandt hoped the move would elicit a legal response by Google.  He speculated that such a lawsuit would either make Google look bad, or his activity would be ruled legal and the case would "begin to restore a public-interest balance to the Web that has been declining ever since big money got behind the dotcoms."
Starting in 2005, Scroogle drew expanded media attention and experienced rapid growth.  In October of 2005, daily visits numbered around 8,000.  "Scroogle Scraper lets you take advantage of Google's search engine without compromising your privacy or allowing your browsing and searching habits to be recorded. We recommend it for all Chrome users," wrote the reviewer.  
In 2010, Scroogle was temporarily offline multiple times, generating headlines about Google blocking the service.
In 2012, Scroogle began to have problems with Google throttling, being periodically blocked for 90-minute intervals.  Google denied targeting Scroogle, saying the site may have been triggering automated anti-spam mechanisms. In February 2012, Scroogle was shut down by its creator.
According to Alexa data, Scroogle was ranked in the top 4000 sites globally in terms of traffic at the time of its demise.

==See also==

*DuckDuckGo
*Ixquick

==References==


