
Skype Technologies S.A., Skype Software S.A., Skype Communications S.A., Skype Inc. and Skype Limited, areSkype Terms of UseWhere is Skype? a group of companies that develop and operate the VoIP software and service Skype. Skype has its headquarters in Luxembourg City, Luxembourg."Terms of Service - Business." Skype. Retrieved on 7 May 2011. "Skype: means Skype Technologies S.A. located at 23-29 Rives de Clausen, 2165 Luxembourg;" Skype was acquired by Microsoft on 13 October 2011.
Skype was released as a simple computer-to-computer, or computer-to-telephone program. Support for paid services such as SkypeOut, SkypeIn, and voice mail allows the company to generate its revenue as well as making local and international telephone calls easier to perform via the user's computer, sometimes cheaper than other companies' rates for similar services.
eBay acquired Skype Technologies S.A. in September 2005 and in April 2009 announced plans to spin it off in a 2010 IPO. 
Skype faced challenges to its intellectual property and political concerns by governments wishing to control their telecommunications systems. As of 2010, Skype was available in 27 languages and has 660 million worldwide users, an average of over 100 million active each month.http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-13350425 Accessed 10 May 2011

==History==

Skype was founded in 2003 by Janus Friis from Denmark and Niklas Zennström from Sweden, In April 2003, Skype.com and Skype.net domain names were registered. In August 2003, the first public beta version was released.
One of the initial names for the project was "Sky peer-to-peer", which was then abbreviated to "Skyper". However, some of the domain names associated with "Skyper" were already taken. Dropping the final "r" left the current title "Skype", for which domain names were available.
In September 2005, SkypeOut was banned in China.
In April 2006, the number of registered users reached 100 million. In October, Skype 2.0 for Mac was released, the first full release of Skype with video for Macintosh, and in December, Skype announced a new pricing structure, with connection fees for all SkypeOut calls. Skype 3.0 for Windows was released.
In 2006, a now-discontinued feature called "Skypecasting" was introduced. It allowed recordings of Skype voice over IP voice calls and teleconferences to be used as podcasts. Skypecasting remained in beta until it was discontinued. Skypecasts hosted public conference calls for up to 100 people at a time. Unlike ordinary Skype p2p conference calls, Skypecasts supported moderation features suitable for panel discussions, lectures, and town hall forums. Skype operated a directory of public Skypecasts. Skypecasts was discontinued from 1 September 2008.
Throughout 2007, updates (3.1, 3.2 and 3.5) added new features including Skype Find, Skype Prime, Send Money (which allowed users to send money via PayPal from one Skype user to another), video in mood, inclusion of video content in chat, call transfer to another person or a group, and auto-redial. Skype 2.7.0.49 (beta) for Mac OS X released adding availability of contacts in the Mac Address Book to the Skype contact list, auto redial, contact groups, public chat creation, and an in-window volume slider in the call window. During several days in August, Skype users were unable to connect to full Skype network in many countries
By early 2008, the tumultuous ownership relations between the founders and eBay had resulted in significant leadership churn, with a succession of Skype presidents including Niklas Zennström, Rajiv Dutta, Alex Kazim, Niklas Zennström (again), and Henry Gomez, all holding that title at various points between 2005 and 2007. The business had failed to meet certain earn-out targets, growth was decelerating, product development had slowed significantly, and in October 2007 eBay took a $1.4 billion 'impairment' on the value of Skype, admitting it had overpaid, and now valuing the company at about $2.7 billion.
In October 2008, analysis revealed TOM-skype — the Chinese version of Skype run by TOM Online — sends content of text messages and encryption keys to monitoring servers.

===Two original founders depart and new CEO appointed===

For the six months after the departure of Niklas and Janus, Michael van Swaaij led the company as Interim CEO, until the appointment of Josh Silverman in February 2008. Under Silverman's 2.5 year tenure, the company focused its product efforts around video calling, ubiquity (gaining high penetration on smartphones, PCs, TVs, and consumer-electronic devices), building tailored offerings for enterprise customers, and diversifying revenue through subscriptions, premium accounts and advertising.
In advancing this strategy, Skype released many new products, substantially revamping its flagship Windows software (3.8 ->4.0), and its Macintosh and Linux software; while introducing new software products for smartphones, and consumer electronics. In 2009, Skype 4.0 was released, featuring full-screen high-quality video calling.
During this period Skype also discontinued lesser-used services such as support for the "Skype Me" presence indicator, which meant that a user was interested in receiving Skype calls from a non-contact. Skype also discontinued its SkypeCast service without explanation and added internal monthly and daily usage caps on their SkypeOut subscriptions, which had been advertised as "unlimited". Skype also discontinued its "dragonfly" feature, a community-generated yellow-pages product, and other features which were deemed to be under-performing or a distraction to management. Many users and observers had commented on the high rate of dropped calls and the difficulty reconnecting dropped calls. Updates including versions for the Sony PSP hand-held gaming system, version 2.0 for Linux with support for video-conferencing.
As part of its efforts to diversify revenues, Skype launched in April 2008 Skype for SIP, a service aimed at business users. At that time around 35 per cent of Skype's users were business users.
Marketing efforts were also re-vamped, with a particular focus on innovative partnerships with TV broadcasters to integrate Skype into their programming. The Oprah Winfrey Show began using Skype regularly to host video calls between Oprah and her viewers at home, culminating in a show dedicated exclusively to the wonders of Skype ("where the Skype are You", aired first in May 2009). Skype also became commonly used by network news stations around the world, as a cost-effective replacement for sending satellite trucks, and enabling fast response from citizen journalists. Skype was also integrated into scripted TV programming, such as Californication; and in the seventh season of the U.S. syndicated version of the British game show Who Wants To Be a Millionaire in a new Ask the Expert video chat lifeline.
These efforts led to dramatically accelerating growth of Skype's Connected Users and Paying Users in 2008 and 2009.

===eBay sells 70%===

Building on the revitalization which had begun in 2008, eBay announced, in April 2009, plans to spin off Skype through an initial public offering in 2010.
In January 2010, Josh Silverman was recognized for his accomplishments in revitalizing Skype by being named First Runner Up in the TechCrunch "Crunchies" award for "Best CEO", beaten only by Mark Pincus of Zynga.
In May, Skype 5.0 beta was released, with support of group video calls with up to four participants. Also in May, Skype released an updated client for the Apple iPhone which allowed Skype calls to be made over a 3G network. Originally, a 3G call subscription plan was to be instituted in 2011, but Skype eventually dropped the plan.
In June 2010, following the rapid departure of first Daniel Berg and then Madhu Yarlagadda as Chief Technology Officer and Chief Development Officer, Mark Gillett an operating executive at Silver Lake Partners assumed the role of Chief Development Officer following a period of several months working closely with Joshua Silverman to drive the transformation of the business and acceleration of cross platform and mobile product delivery.
On 9 August 2010, Skype filed with the United States Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) to raise up to $100 million in an initial public offering Sources reported the company in fact expected to raise at least $1 billion.
In October 2010, Skype announced it had named Tony Bates as its CEO; Bates has been a senior VP at Cisco and responsible for its multi-billion-dollar enterprise, commercial and small business division.
On 14 October 2010, Skype 5.0 for Windows was released with a number of improvements and feature additions, including a Facebook tab to allow users to SMS, chat with, or call their Facebook friends via Skype from the News Feed.
On 14 January 2011, Skype acquired Qik, a mobile video sharing platform.
In March 2011, Skype named Jonathan Chadwick as its Chief Financial Officer and confirmed that Mark Gillett would serve full time as Chief Development and Operating Officer following the departure of Chief Financial and Administrative Officer Adrian Dillon.

===Acquisition by Microsoft===

On 10 May 2011, Microsoft announced it had agreed to acquire Skype for $8.5 billion.

==Legal issues==

=== P2P licensing dispute lawsuit and IPO offering ===

In its 2008 Annual Report, eBay admitted to an on-going dispute between it and Joltid Ltd. over the licensing of its peer-to-peer "Global Index" technology in its application. It announced that it terminated a standstill agreement, allowing either company to sue. On 1 April 2009, eBay filed with a UK court to settle the legal dispute. A few days later, eBay announced the planning of a public stock offering in 2010 to spin off Skype as a separate, publicly-owned company. Some media outlets characterized the proposed sale and ongoing provision of Skype as being under threat because of the concurrent dispute.
On 1 September 2009, a group of investors led by Silver Lake bought 65% of Skype for $1.91 billion. This prompted Joltid to countersue eBay on 17 September 2009.[ref]
 [/ref]

== Other Intellectual property challenges ==

=== Streamcast lawsuit ===

StreamCast Networks filed a complaint in U.S. District Court in Los Angeles, alleging theft of its peer-to-peer technology and violation of the "Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations" statue.  The compliant, titled; StreamCast Networks Inc v. Skype Technologies, S.A., was filed on January 20, 2006 in Federal Court in the Central District of California and assigned Case Number, 2:2006cv00391.  The $4.1 billion lawsuit did not name Skype's parent company, eBay, when initially filed. Steamcast's lawsuit was subsequently amended on May 22, 2006 to include eBay and 21 other party defendants.
In its lawsuit, Streamcast sought a worldwide injunction on the sale and marketing of eBay's Skype Internet voice communication products, as well as billions of dollars in unspecified damages. The lawsuit was finally dismissed in a decision filed on January 19, 2007.

=== IDT lawsuit ===

On June 1, 2006, Net2Phone (the Internet telephone unit of IDT Corp.) filed a lawsuit against eBay and Skype accusing the unit of infringing  

=== GPL lawsuit ===

In July 2007 Skype was found to be guilty by a German court of violating the GNU General Public License in one of its for-sale products, the SMC WSKP100.iTWire - Skype cops GPL violation conviction in German court

== Political issues ==

=== China 2005===

Skype was one of many companies (others include AOL, Microsoft, Yahoo, Cisco) which cooperate with the Chinese government in implementing a system of Internet censorship in mainland China. Critics of such policies argue that it is wrong for companies to profit from censorship and restrictions on freedom of the press and freedom of speech. Human rights advocates such as Human Rights Watch and media groups such as Reporters Without Borders speculate that if companies stopped contributing to the authorities' censorship efforts, the government could be forced to change.
Niklas Zennström, then chief executive of Skype, told reporters that its joint venture partner in China was operated in compliance with domestic law. "TOM Online had implemented a text filter, which is what everyone else in that market is doing," said Mr Zennström. "Those are the regulations," he said. "I may like or not like the laws and regulations to operate businesses in the UK or Germany or the US, but if I do business there I choose to comply with those laws and regulations. I can try to lobby to change them, but I need to comply with them. China in that way is not different."

=== France 2005 ===

In September 2005, the French Ministry of Research, acting on advice from the General Secretariat of National Defence, issued an official disapproval of the use of Skype in public research and higher education; some services are interpreting this decision as an outright ban. The exact reasons for the decision were not given.

=== United States, CALEA 2006 ===

In May 2006, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) successfully applied the Communications Assistance for Law Enforcement Act to allow wiretapping on digital phone networks. Skype did compliant to the Act, and stated that it does not plan to comply.Can Skype Keep Its Secrets?

==See also==

* Features of Skype

==References==

==External links==

*

