
Userful is a desktop virtualization company that provides zero-client products for education, VDI, digital dignage and SMBs. The company develops software to create Linux-based virtual desktops that enable 20 or more users to simultaneously share 1 computer through ethernet. The company’s approach is similar to thin clients but promises better streaming video and audio performance at lower costs.
Userful, based in Calgary, Alberta is a privately held for-profit company with resellers.
In February 2009, Userful announced what is claimed to be the world's largest desktop virtualization deployment, 356,800 virtual desktops in Brazil.
In April 2012, Userful announced its partnership with ViewSonic to produce a Linux-based zero-client product. http://finance.yahoo.com/news/viewsonic-r-userful-partner-bring-132500625.html
In May 2012, Userful launched version 5 of its MultiSeat software, which adds Ethernet support.  http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/userful-revolutionizes-thin-client-computing-with-solution-that-is-twice-as-fast-and-half-the-price-152496145.html

==History==

Current President and CEO, Timothy Griffin founded Userful Corporation in 1999. The company commenced work on a kernel-based approach to a multi-station platform computer, but later abandoned the idea due to a problem with multiple video card support. Initially a software development company, issues with the duplication and time consumption involved in setting up users on multiple computers, along with installing multiple programs for each computer, led to development of the one-step, multiseat computing technology that is the core Userful product, Userful Multiplier.
Since the release of Desktop Multiplier in 2002, Userful Corporation has focused primarily on schools, public libraries, military, and oilfields for deployment. Userful is based in Calgary, Alberta, Canada with a second office located in Victoria, BC, Canada.

==Linux Adoption and Education==

Key factors for Linux OS adoption in schools are that Linux is free, there is increased security with its usage, and that it is free open source software. Some examples of governments who have started to switch from using proprietary operating systems to Linux include USA, Germany, Spain, France, Mexico amongst others.

==Green Computing==

Shared resource computing has environmentally friendly benefits such as reducing electronic waste, lowering energy consumption, and reducing C02 emissions. Userful users saved over 200,000 tonnes of CO2 in 2009 through use of their multiseat software.

==Products==

===Userful MultiSeat Linux ===

Userful MultiSeat Linux is software that turns 1 Linux computer into up to 20+ independent computer stations and it's bundled with educational OS and applications.  It leverages USB multiseat devices and Ethernet Zero Clients to turn a monitor, keyboard and mouse into a complete computer station. It enables schools to deploy large numbers of stations for a low cost, whether in the classroom, computer lab, or school library. It is easy to set up, use and maintain, and provides teachers with the tools they need to give their students a high quality, computer-based education. Since Userful MultiSeat is Linux based, the operating system and application software are all free. Userful MultiSeat Linux 5 supports the following USB MultiSeat devices: HP t100, HP t150, HP t200, Atrust M200, Atrust M202, ViewSonic VMA10, ViewSonic VMA15, Goodway DU2600. UML5 supports the following Zero Clients: HP t200, Atrust M220, Atrust M320, ViewSonic VMA20, ViewSonic VMA25.

===Userful Multiplier===

Userful Multiplier is a commercial Linux-based multiseat configuration software package developed by Userful.  It allows multiple independent users to connect to a single host PC at the same time, each with their own monitor, keyboard, mouse, and applications. Depending on the hardware used, up to 10 fully operable, independent computer stations can run from a single computer.  Userful Multiplier leverages off basic dual-head GPU technology and USB inputs to turn a monitor, keyboard and mouse into a complete computer station.

===Userful Desktop===

Userful Desktop is a Linux-based multiseat operating system that combines a mixture of proprietary administrative tools, and a modified Red Hat distribution, with a GNOME desktop.
Userful Desktop is delivered as a complete set including software, web portal access, standard hardware, monitors, keyboards, mice, dual-head video cards and USB hubs with various options for further customization, such as including an external USB diskette drive.
Userful Desktop can be described as a multi-station system, consisting of a system unit, with one or more stations attached, plus Userful Desktop system software. The result is a thin client application that creates as many as 10 station terminals from a single PC.
Userful's software can be customized through a Web portal called Userful Manager that allows administrators to adjust hundreds of settings, from putting a time limit on the computer's use, to privacy protectors that clean the computer when a person logs out. Settings and updates are automatically rolled out to every computer linked to the system. Usage reports allow administrators to see how the system is running as a whole or drill down to one individual station to see how it is being used.
The system's foundation is strong user permissions, multiple-user login and Security Enhanced Linux (SE Linux).  To ensure precautionary safety measures, only the default kernel is in the boot menu, enabling the computer to boot only from the hard drive. A command line is not supplied on the desktop. Although disk and flash drives are automatically mounted on the desktop, this general security risk is secured by limiting the time of login for each user and deleting the users’ home directories once log out occurs. The system is claimed to be virus-free.

===Userful Pre-Book===

Pre-Book is an open source PC reservation system consisting of both a Linux based server and Windows and Linux client management software.  
The software enables enforcement of equitable time usage on publicly accessible computers. Key features include the ability to set up user grace periods, no-show penalties, holiday hours, and PAM authentication. Users are able to book time from remote locations as well as on the computers themselves.  The client software is available for Windows as well as a multiseat locked-down Linux distro (Userful Desktop).

==Product Competitors==

Userful MultiSeat Linux 2011 and Userful Multiplier software are the Linux-based equivalents of Windows MultiPoint Server 2010 for multiseat solutions in the education sector.

==See also==

*Multiseat
*NComputing

==References==

==External links==

*Userful website

