
xOS Webtop is an open source webtop OS (Web Desktop) that strives to offer a cloud computing experience that is easily accessible from any location. It is mainly written in HTML5, PHP, and JavaScript. xOS includes a Desktop or Mobile environment with a number of features, applications, and system utilities, with more features continuously being added. It is accessible on Windows, Mac, Linux, iOS (Apple), and Android (operating system) through the web browser.About xOS - from the Makers

== History ==

The first version of xOS Webtop started development in December 2010, and later became available on May 14, 2011 after several months of development. When the initial webtop did not work entirely as planned, XProduct posted a version of xOS 2.0 Desktop Edition online for public use and quickly went back into development to work on what would later become xOS Webtop 3.0. Development on a version to follow version 2.0 first started as a beta testing version before the release of xOS 2.0 Desktop Edition; this beta was reworked from the ground up to become an entirely new version of xOS. In early July a beta of xOS Webtop 3.0 came out and soon after, xOS Webtop was recognized as a webtop that was "catching up in the market."10 Virtual Operating Systems Inside Your Browser, - xOS is recognized in its early stages. The first further development and updates on this version were very fast-paced to the point of being rushed, which resulted in a sub-par experience that had many problems. During the continued development on the Desktop Edition of xOS version 3.0, a mobile version was also released (under the name xOS 3.0 Mobile) and continued to be tested and developed as well. On January 5, 2012, XProduct released the newest version of xOS Desktop Edition, version 3.1. This version includes a heavily updated interface to fix many bugs and glitches that were occurring with version 3.0, as well as a slightly improved setup and additional features. An updated Mobile Edition, also version 3.1, was released to coincide with the release of version 3.1 of the Desktop Edition, featuring an updated interface and design from the previous version. Version 3.1 is the first version of the webtop to utilize XProduct's new server, and the website was updated at a new domain, http://xos.xproduct.net/ upon the release of version 3.1.

== Development ==

Development is steady and worked on very often. Development includes fixing bugs and uploading fixes as soon as possible, and testing to make sure the program works properly and is secure. Unlike earlier versions of the Desktop Edition, XProduct is not releasing updates unless they actually work and have been tested. A tablet version of xOS is in the works to add to the Desktop and Mobile platforms. A developer page is available on the xOS Webtop website for all those interested in development.Developer Page

== References ==

== External links ==

* xOS Info

